			
					1940 	                                               
                                               Chapter 1  
					 KARI			 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
	The melt was on, the air cold in the shade but warm in the sun, the horses as excited as we are to be heading up the mountain on a perfect spring morning. We climbed, Erik and Anna and Lotte and Jurgen and Sven and I, up through pungent pines where the snow still lingered, knee deep. We jumped logs felled by winter storms, splashed through streams hurtling down the slope, laughed and shouted to make our voices echo back to us off the mountain. Then it was single file on the narrow path leading to the top of the ridge, the roar of the waterfall ever louder.
	I’d seen it so many times but it was always a miracle -- how the melting snow turned the waterfall’s summer trickle into a roaring torrent that plunged off the mountain, throwing spray back at us, crashing to boulders far below. I’m drawn to the edge every time, can’t resist looking over, mist cooling my face, half scared, half thrilled, my stomach doing flip-flops. There was Trondheim spread out below, its tiny houses, red and gold and white, lined up like kids blocks, and beyond my city the glitter of an ocean that went on forever.
	The top of the world.
	We hobbled the horses and emptied our rucksacks — lefse wrapped around pieces of chicken, my contribution, two thermoses of hot chocolate from Erik and Lotte, slow-cured ham from Jurgen’s father’s shop, sliced so thin you could see through it, sugary sandkakor baked by Anna.
	I lay back on the flat stones that edge the waterfall, belly full, eyes closed, feeling their warmth penetrate to my bones, feeling the waterfall’s vibrations, the spring sun strong on my face. A rumbling louder than the waterfall. Thunder? No sign of a storm, the sky was clear, but the rumbling was louder, closer. We were on our feet. Then I saw them— specks in the distance growing fast.
	Planes. Huge planes, a dozen of them, close enough to see black swastikas painted on their sides, low enough to see gun-green undercarriages as they screamed over us, blotting out the sun, shaking the earth with the roar of ten waterfalls. We stood there, gazing up, stunned, trying to make sense of it. The Germans had invaded Poland, but Norway, neutral Norway, neutral during the last war? Only the day before the Foreign Minister had been on the radio telling us the Germans had promised not to attack and we’d believed him, were so desperate to believe him!
	Then there were the rumors. The not knowing. Bits of news from those with telephones and friends in Oslo — the royal family escaped because our hopeless but brave soldiers gave them an extra half hour by blowing up the battleship Blucher as it steamed into Oslo harbor. No one knew where they were now, but there are rumors they were seen in Elvurum, rumors that the government and parliament have fled North too, that the Germans were chasing them.
	We cheered at some good news — Crown Princess Martha and the children made it to Sweden where her uncle is King, but our own King Haakon and Prince Olav were still on the run from German paratroopers and German bombers. Our ears were glued to the BBC for news of fighting in the north, in Narvik. We didn’t know what to believe. One day we hoped, the next day despaired, and the ups and downs and the not knowing were tearing us apart.
	Then Narvik fell. It was all over by the eighth of June. The King and the Crown Prince escaped to England, but British promises of protection? Worthless. Even worse, what I could hardly believe — there were Norwegians who actually welcomed the Nazis.
	Germans poured into Trondheim, more every day. They seemed surprised at how much we hated them, as if they thought we’d be honored to be the star of their Third Reich because we were descendants of the Vikings, their model of a pure Aryan race. 
	Every day the sound of German singing and black boots marching. Every day grey-green uniforms and grey-green tanks and the blood red flag with the black swastika that hung from every public building. Impossible to imagine another future, hard enough to remember the Norway that was.
	April 9, 1940. One day to change your whole life. No way we could imagine what the Nazis would do to us. We were innocent as little kids watching those planes roar over, not imagining how we’d change, how our world would change, how important such things as red hats would become.
	Everyone’s lives were put on hold, not just ours. All those plans and goals that once seemed so important? Suddenly they didn’t matter that much — not when your own survival, the survival of your family, your friends, your country — when all of it hung by a thread.
                                                           Chapter 2
                                                             KARI
	It happened on Midsommar, almost midnight, the sun sitting on the horizon like it didn’t want the party to end. I was pedaling back from the celebration on the shores of the fjord, not the normal rowdy Midsommar, not with Germans standing around watching. Still, there was enough to eat for once, too much to drink as usual, a band, and the flower-decked Midsommar pole to dance around. I was wearing my bunad for the first time. Mama spent most nights last winter embroidering so it would be ready for Midsommar.
	I came around a bend and almost ran into three Germans blocking the road. When I slammed on the brakes one of them grabbed my handlebars. The stink of alcohol was strong. I looked around, frantic. I was alone.
	“Look what we have here,” the tall one said. “A perfect little Norwegian. All dressed up.”
	“Time for a dance.” It was the fat one. He yanked me off my bicycle. I struggled to break away, but his arms were around me. I pummeled him hard as I could but he squeezed me tighter. The brass buttons of his uniform dug into my chest, his fingers dug into my back.
	“Slut med det!” I spat out.
	“Too bad I don’t speak Norwegian,” he said in slurred German.
	The tall one grabbed one of my braids. “Midsommar souvenir,” he said and pulled out a pocket knife, opened it. His hand went over my mouth, over my nose and I gagged at the taste of sweat, at the smell of him. I struggled to breathe, flung my head from side to side until I felt the sharp edge of the blade against my neck. He yanked my braid taut. The dull sound of sawing, sawing, and then he held up the braid, long, blond. “Need a pair,” he said, and grabbed the other one.
	“Enough!” It was the third German, younger than the rest. “She’s just a kid. Leave her alone.”
	“O, come on, Andreas,” the tall one said, but the young one gave him a shove and I could breathe again. I brought my knee up — hard. The fat one let go of me, doubled over, grunting. I grabbed my bike and pedaled, hard as I could, vision blurry, sobbing, hearing their laughter.
	Nausea. I made it to the toilet, retching. When the shaking stopped I looked in the mirror. My hair hung all raggedy on one side. No way I could tell Mama and Papa what happened, not with Papa’s temper. He’d go berserk and no stupid bit of hair is worth what the Nazis would do to him. 
	I took scissors from the drawer in the kitchen and stood in front of the mirror. The braid was thick, the scissors not that sharp. I winced at the sound and it took a few tries before it dropped into my hand, a strange, limp, heavy, dead thing that had been a part of me since I was six when Mama had to cut the tree sap out of my matted hair.
	I lifted the braid to my cheek, felt the bristly end where I'd cut it. It was already losing its shape, coming un-plaited. I carried it to the back garden, dug a hole by the fence with Papa’s shovel and dropped it in -- this blonde thing, so pitiful and helpless looking against the black dirt. How long would it take for the microbes and the worms to digest it, that part of me that was disappearing under the damp soil, how long to make it vanish, like it never existed? 
	I was right to dread how upset Mama and Papa would be when they saw my ragged, chopped off hair. Papa ranted and Mama had tears in her eyes. At least they didn’t doubt the story I told them — that sixteen is way too old for braids.
	Lying in bed trying to force sleep. I heard the storm come up, the wind moaning through the gaps around my bedroom windows, the thunder cracks, the bolts of lightning.
	Then the howling and Mama shaking me. And I understood.
	The howling was coming from me.
	It’s the same now, on too many nights, just on the edge of sleep, the smell of that hand, the stink of that breath, the paralysis of that iron grip. It’s all there before I fall into the dark. Sometimes when I howl in the middle of the night it wakes me. Sometimes it’s Mama who does that and can’t understand why, can’t know why. During the day just the sight of them and the terror starts. The Nazi knife killed off the old Kari, the reckless, fearless one that used to be me.
	I have a bob now, just below my ears, thanks to Hannah Andersen, Mama's hair dresser friend. My hand’s still surprised when I reach up to touch the braids. It’s still a jolt every time I look in the mirror and I pray every night that the memory of that day will disappear, buried deep like my missing hair. It’s not working.
	Braids. Ridiculous. Others have lost so much more I keep telling myself, but it doesn’t stop panic at the sight of them.
	It doesn’t stop the nightmares.
          	   		              Chapter 3
			                      KARI
	Lotte’s in the arena, riding to music from their wind-up Victrola. I stand at the fence and watch the magic — Saga and Lotte dancing. At least that’s what it looks like to me. The mare’s strides are in perfect rhythm with the music and Lotte’s just sitting there, looking like she’s not doing a thing. I know that’s not true, but I’m a such beginner it looks like magic to me.
	Watching her it’s hard to believe doctors thought she’d never walk again — not after we almost lost her to polio. They didn’t know what a fighter she is. Polio left Lotte with a twisted leg and a deformed foot that needs a special shoe but on the back of a horse she’s incredible and mounted the leg and foot don’t matter. Not a bit. She was on her way to the top with Saga, the mare she rescued and trained. She was ready to take on the best riders in Norway — before the bastard Nazis. 
	The music ends. Lotte rides over to me, pointing at my hair, shock on her face. 
	“What did you do, Kari?”
	“Do you like it?”
	“I love it. Your parents let you do that?”
	“Not exactly. I got tired of looking like a twelve-year-old, so I cut them off,” I lie.
	“Good for you! Maybe Mama will let me get rid of mine.” 
	She gives me a grin. “Erik’s in the house. You want to say hello?”
	She knows just hearing his name makes my face go hot  — which is exactly what happens.
	“Hey, I’m here for a lesson, that’s all.”
	“Of course you are.” She’s still grinning, We start for the barn. A car’s coming up the driveway, long, shiny, windows open, dance music playing on the radio. The screen door on the porch bangs. It's Erik. He stops, stares. My hand wants to go to my hair, but I make it stay where it is. 
	“Kari,” he says, “is that you?” My face is now completely red. 
	 I just stand there, a stupid smile on my face. He’s staring. The car horn honks. I hear a girl’s laugh as he gets in. The dance music floats back to us as they drive off.
	My lesson is a disaster. I can’t focus, barely hear what Lotte’s saying. Finally she gives up.
	“What’s wrong, Kari? Have you forgotten everything I’ve ever taught you?” She shakes her head, exasperated. “Hopeless. Next time I’ll make sure Erik’s nowhere around.”
	“Whose car was that?”
	“Oh, that was Ilse. She’s been around a lot lately.”
	Ilse! It hits me, physically, a punch in the gut.  
	My ride home is a blur. I usually pedal back slowly in the dusky summer twilight. Not tonight. I’m blind to the changing colors of the sky, deaf to evening bird calls, caught between those few seconds of Erik’s smile — and what I’ve known forever.
	Ilse gets what Ilse wants.			
					Chapter 4
					   ERIK	
	He stands  there, staring.
	Ilse honks the horn, breaks the spell. Erik gives himself a shake, walks to the car and climbs into the passenger seat. She revs the engine, makes a three point turn. Gravel flies as she hits the accelerator. They bounce down the rutted driveway, music blaring.
	What happened back there?
	Kari. It was just Kari. The Kari he’s known since she was six, his sister’s best friend — the little kid he’s teased and tormented for years.
	What happened back there? She looked at him and her look sent a tremor through him. He still feels it.  
	Those long braids she’s had forever. Missing. That can’t be it. But that’s what made him look— and look again. What he saw wasn’t the grade school image he carries in his mind and what happened to him had nothing to do with the Kari he’s known forever.
	“.  .  . so I said ‘you must be joking.’” Ilse turns to look at him. “Erik, are you listening?”
	“What? Yeah. Of course I’m listening.”
	But he isn’t. He doesn’t remember a thing she’s said. Her voice goes on and on but this new thing has ahold of him, insisting, like some veil’s lifted, like something new is shining on his life. Come on, Erik, don’t be stupid. You’re her best friend’s brother. That’s all. She’d think you were a creep if you even hinted at anything else. 
	You think you saw something in her eyes, something that made you want to stare into them forever? Get a grip!
	Plus, here’s Ilse, right beside you, and that’s her hand on your knee. 
	He shakes his head, takes a deep breath, and turns to Ilse. 
 					Chapter 5
					  KARI			 
	I lie in bed watching the sky get darker. It’s after midnight but sleep won’t come. 
	Ilse. Ilse. Ilse. She’s done it again, a pro at ruining something special. She’s been doing it for ten years. 
	Every detail of that first time is still stamped on my memory.
	 We were invited for tea and my seven-year-old self could hardly wait to meet this Ilse, someone my own age, could hardly wait to see inside the big house. The house was more than I’d  imagined — thick carpets on every floor, overstuffed chairs and sofas in bright flowery patterns, china figurines everywhere, even a piano.
	And there she was, sitting on one of those overstuffed sofas. Dark blue taffeta, snowy white stockings, patent leather shoes. She stared at me, at my heavy wool stockings, bagging a little at the knee, my everyday shoes, how short my one good dress was. Shabby. That’s what her look said. I still feel it. 
	“Ilse, take Kari up to  your room. I’m sure you’ll find something to play with,” Mrs. Knudsen said. Ilse started up the stairs. I followed.
	“We do spoil her,” I heard Mrs. Knudsen say. “Her asthma, you know.”
	I stood in the doorway to her room taking it all in, stunned. The flowery pink quilt  covered with a collection of teddy bears, all sizes of teddy bears, and on her bureau another collection, tiny dolls, each in a different national dress. There was a two story doll house  against one wall, painted a deep gold with fancy white trim, looking just like the Knudsen’s own mansion.  
	“You can come in, you know. Don’t just stand there.”  That’s what she said.
	Ilse lifted the latch on one side of the doll house. The whole front swung open. I gaped at miniature replicas of the Knudsen’s furniture. She reached in, picked up one of the tiny dolls and started to undress it. I moved toward the desk, drawn by jars filled with colored pencils, by the thick pad of drawing paper. 
	“You can look, but don’t touch,” she said, as I reached for one of the pencils. “Papa ordered them specially. Mrs. Larsen says I’m very good at drawing.“
	I sat on the bed, miserable, watching her dress and undress her dolls, listening to her talk to them. Not a word to me. Finally Mama called. Ilse didn’t say good bye, didn’t even look at me. I picked up the smallest teddy bear and stuffed it in my pocket. I’m not sure why — I don’t even like teddy bears. Maybe it was because this girl had so much, maybe it was because she wouldn’t even know it was missing.
	I was right. Ilse didn’t miss it. It was Mama who found the bear but it was Papa who marched me to the Knudsens to apologize. When Mrs. Knudsen said I should keep it, Papa said he’d never let his daughter take something that wasn’t hers. 
	“Thief.” Ilse said it under her breath when I handed her the bear.
	And that’s the story she spread. From my first day at school. 
	Every summer I’d tell myself  school would be different. This year she’d have forgotten the stupid bear. Wrong. In the lunch room or in the hallway I’d see her whisper something to her friends and hear them giggle. And that giggle would stay in the back of my mind for the rest of the day, a dull shadow over everything.
	The worst part? I couldn’t say anything back. Mama just looked at me with sad eyes when I told her, and said I should make allowances because Ilse really wasn’t well. What Mama didn’t have to say was that she needed to keep her job cleaning the Knudsen’s house and store, and that Papa needed to keep the lease on the Knudsen’s fishing boat, and that I shouldn’t risk messing it up. Something I don’t understand. Mrs. Knudsen is one of the nicest people I know. How can someone so nice raise a daughter like Ilse?

	That’s just how it is. Ever since I was seven I’ve stuffed down all the curses, all the anger that makes me want to punch her, swallowed the tears — saved them up for nighttimes, alone in my bed.
	Now it’s happened again, but this time she probably doesn’t even know what she’s done, though if she did it would make her day!
	 Erik’s look. That moment. I probably imagined it. I’ve wanted him to look at me that way for so long, wanted him to stop treating me like a kid sister. For that moment I thought he had.  Before the shiny car and her laugh and the dance music.
			   		   Chapter 6
					     KARI
	 It’s our last chance to camp in the mountains before the cold sets in, something we do every year, like a summer ritual we wouldn’t miss for anything. But this year I almost come up with an excuse not to go. Making small talk and acting normal around Erik is a lot harder since that day at their farm, and spending a whole weekend that close to him? Still, I finally decide that if I let Ilse keep me from having good times with my friends, she’s really won.
	 I can’t let that  happen.

	We set out early with a couple of extra Fjords to pack our gear. There’s a chill in the air, a reminder of the coming frost, and the horses feel it. They’re hoof stamping, impatient to get underway. We climb through a shower of falling leaves, already a colorful carpet on the trail. I breathe in that earthy perfume they release as we ride over them.
	Kotlasjon. A turquoise blue mountain lake. It’s a mirror, reflecting the peaks above it and the trees on its banks, all decked out in their last gasp colors — every shade of purple and yellow and orange and red. The lake’s full of fish and the woods full of late blueberries. My mouth’s already watering at the thought of eating my fill. All this food for the taking! It makes this year’s trip even more special.  
	We  hobble the horses and  unload our gear — not that we’ve brought that much. Sleeping bags, some banged up metal plates and forks, fishing poles, of course. There’s plenty of wood for the fire and the fish are biting and it’s beginning to feel like all the other years. I start to relax.
	Something has definitly changed. Erik’s still teasing me and there are still fights in the icy water, but he doesn’t try to duck me and hold me under the way he usually does. And his smile is different.
	Wishful thinking? My mind’s a mess.
	At dinner he sits next to me. It makes me so jumpy I can barely eat the grilled trout and blueberries I’ve been looking forward to all day. Sven insists we sing the old camping songs we’ve always sung and Erik’s voice so close to my ear drives the words right out of my head.
	The sky is full of stars in the fading light. Lotte puts more branches on the fire and it leaps up, roaring, crackling, singing its own song. I’m just beginning to relax in its warmth when Erik’s hand reaches for mine. The shock of it. A jolt to my toes. My hand jerks away on its own. I turn to look at him. There’s a smile on his face, definitely not his usual teasing smile, and when he takes my hand again I let him.
	Sven starts another song. Erik pulls me to my feet. 
	Beyond the firelight he gives me my second kiss, totally different from my first, and when his lips touch mine it’s like I’m falling, spinning out of control, and then he does it again. And again.
	Take that, Ilse,
					   Chapter 7
					   ANDREAS 
	Andreas Bauer sits on a bench in the makeshift barracks polishing the Sergeant’s boots. They’d told him he was lucky. The Fuhrer would build Fortress Norway, the crown jewel of the new Reich, and the Norwegians, those perfect Aryans, would  welcome them. Andreas has followed their skiing champions for years. Maybe he’d even meet some of them. He’d been excited.
	He’d been an idiot.
	What a lie! Two months of muttered curses, murderous looks, people crossing the street, changing seats on the tram just to avoid him. He enters a bar or a shop and people stop talking. The tension. The hostility.  Exhausting, wearing him down. He'd wanted to love this beautiful country. He’d wanted to meet these beautiful people, get to know them. Ha! Never going to happen, not to a shunned, despised occupier. It’s makes the pain of homesickness even worse. 
	Andreas stops buffing the boot.
	What would they be doing now? He looks at his watch. Little brother Johann should be almost home from school. He’d keep them in stitches over supper imitating the Hitler Youth drill instructors, not much older than he is, who love to yell at Johann and his friends, ordering push-up discipline every chance they get. Papa would have tales from the mill, and Mama from her day at school, and if he were there, he’d have saved up his own stories. After dinner they’d linger around the table, mostly discussing what was happening in Germany, Mama relieved that prices aren’t doubling every day like they did before the Nazis, Papa  ranting about the new laws outlawing labor unions. Then there would be the rumors, terrible rumors. Roundups of ‘enemies of the state,’ especially Communists, and what about the Adlers down the street who disappeared? What happened to them?
	Mama and Papa and Johann. When will he see them again?  When will he even see a friendly smile again? The pain of missing. Always there. And he’s in a country that hates him, polishing boots for the Third Reich. 
					  ANNA
					Chapter 7
	Anna is washing coffee cups at the Terrassen Cafe, still smarting from Kari’s horrible name calling. She’d have told Kari and Lotte soon enough. Not like she’s tried to hide it from them, not really. Yesterday they saw her with Fritz.
	 A lot of people said you shouldn’t even talk to a German, but Anna had been so sure they’d understand that Fritz was different, so sure they’d know what he meant to her. Kari hadn’t even given her a chance to explain, had exploded right in Anna’s face, called Fritz a dirty Nazi, called her a collaborating traitor. She’d yelled back that Kari and Lotte were just jealous because they’d never even get a glance from someone like Lieutenant Fritz Schneider — not with Lotte’s foot, not with Kari’s flat chest. She’d seen how her words had hurt, the anger blazing in Kari’s eyes before she put her arm around Lotte’s shoulders and led her away. They haven’t spoken to her since.
	She’d give a lot to take back those words — but not if it meant giving up Fritz, a man, not a boy like the awkward, pimply jerks who follow her around at school making rude remarks. A real man. A gorgeous man who says she is gorgeous too, who has perfect manners and treats her to sweets at Mormor’s Tea Salon, who opens doors for her, who takes her arm and makes her feel like a film star.	
	That first day. He walked into the Terrassen Cafe and stayed until closing. The next day he was there again and the one after that and then he started coming at the end of her shift. He’d take her arm and they’d walk along the fjord, and under the bridge, away from prying eyes, they would kiss and she would not object to his wandering hands. All of her goes warm at the memory.
	She’d been so sure they’d understand, even be happy for her knowing what her life is like. They’ve seen the bruises, know her parents think her looks are curse. They’ve heard the horrible names they call her, know they accuse her of the most disgusting things if she’s even a few minutes late getting home.
	Kari and Lotte should be happy now that she’s found someone like Fritz who thinks she’s wonderful, who thinks she’s amazing.
	Their words hurt, so bad. But, she won’t give him up. 
	   
					Chapter 8
					  KARI
	September, still summer during the day, but the nights have decided it's autumn. A film of frost coated everything for the first time this morning. It didn’t last long, disappeared once the sun was full up. I don’t mind the cold, can’t wait for snow and skiing and skating, but I hate how the days get shorter, the dark winning out little by little until the sun just gives up  — barely enough energy to show up on the horizon. 
	School starts this week. Mostly I’m looking forward to it. Maybe life will be more normal once we’re back in the routine. At least my brain will have something to focus on except the tanks in the streets, the damn strutting Germans — and not having enough of anything.
	Sven. I’m meeting him at the sauna on Fjordgata. I don’t get to see him that much anymore — he moved out to an apartment he shares with friends before the invasion. I’ll see him even less once he goes to Oslo to start the engineering course he’s saving up for.
	Brother Sven. 	Five years older, but always there for me, my distant cousin, adopted by Mama and Papa when his parents died in a car crash before I was born. He’s all grown up now, crewing on Papa’s fishing boat. Sven’s always been fascinated by how stuff works, forever taking things apart — mostly able to put them back together. 
	Ever since I was little I’ve told him things I’d never tell Mama or Papa. I wish so much I could tell him what happened to my braids, what it’s done to me. But I can’t. It’s the shame  — like somehow it was my fault, like somehow I let it happen.    
	I park my bike next to his, change into my swimsuit and open the door to the sauna. He greets me with a smile and I spread my towel on the wooden bench next to him. The other person in the sauna gets up, gives us a nod and leaves. Good.
 	“Hot enough for you?” 
	It’s definitely more than hot enough but I say “Not really.”
	So he takes a ladle of water from the bucket and splashes it onto the stones. They sizzle. We’re enveloped in a cloud of steam.  
	“When do you leave for Oslo?” I ask.  
	“I’m not going. They cancelled the course. The damn Germans commanderred  the building. One more thing to hate them for.”
	“Oh, Sven, you’ve saved up for so long!”
	He shakes his head. “At least Papa won’t have to find another crew member.” He stretches out, sighs. When he speaks his voice is quiet. “I don’t want to be a fisherman for the rest of my life, Kari.”
	“Maybe when the war’s over,” I say.
	“Sure. When the war’s over.”
	It’s what everyone says. Dreams put on hold. 
	“At least I was lucky, Kari.” He stares up at the ceiling. “I had great growing up years — no curfews, plenty of parties, lots of laughs, getting into trouble, getting out of trouble.” He shakes his head and gives my hand a squeeze. “The Nazis have robbed you of all that. You’re missing out on years when you shouldn’t have to think too much, shouldn’t have to watch every word you say, everything you do. You’re growing up way too fast, Kari.”
	Sven understands, as usual, and he’s put it into words, everything I’ve been feeling. I can’t imagine anymore what life would be like without the Germans. The weight of them crushes everything — trust and laughter and fun. I can’t imagine what it would be like to say whatever I want to say, do whatever I want to do, without worrying about who’s watching, who’s listening. I give Sven a weak smile, lean back, close my eyes and feel the heat warming my bones, feel his hand on mine. I love him so much, this brother who listens and cares, who understands.  	
	“Time for a dip,” Sven says.
	We stand and stretch. He opens the door and we step onto the dock. The sun’s warm on my shoulders. It shoots sparks off the water and makes the fjord into a sea of diamonds.
	“Ready?” Sven dives in, barely making a splash.
	I know the shock that’s coming. I hesitate like I always do, take a deep breath and jump. The icy water grabs me, pulling me down, down. I propel my body up, break the surface and let out a scream — like I always do, making Sven laugh. I swim, arms and legs pumping, the salty water holding me up, the shock of it wearing off, leaving my body tingling, filled with the wonder of moving through this watery world. It would be good to be a fish. To stay here a universe away from Nazis and war. A universe away from fear.    
		  			Chapter 15
					   KARI
	I herringbone my way up the steep slope, lungs near exploding. A push to the top, then a tuck for the descent on the winter’s first snow. Jurgen’s right behind me as we cruise to a stop at the bottom, both bent over, hands on knees, gasping, inhaling lungs full of frigid mountain air. 
	“Thought I had you back there,” he says, panting.
	“You should know better,” I say, panting too. “When will you learn? You’re never going to beat me.” We’d both laugh if we could spare the breath. Ever since second grade it’s been who can out-ski who? It never gets settled, but that’s okay.  
	We’re at the five kilometer mark on the cross country trail. I pull a thermos out of my knapsack and pour each of us a cup of ersatz coffee. Roasted acorns. Disgusting. At least it’s hot. We lean against a fallen log, the forest so quiet, snow blanketed, tucked in for the winter. Up here everything is peace. We’re beyond the war — at least for a little while. We sip our ‘coffee,’ steam rising from our breaths and our cups. A pale sun pierces the clouds. I raise my face to the slight warmth.
	“I’ve decided,” Jurgen says, and stops.
	“Decided what?”
	“I have to do something, Kari. It’s my father. He’s been telling the Germans where to find hidden livestock in exchange for his weekly cigarettes and schnapps, but now he’s started passing on gossip he hears in the butcher shop, all the anti-Nazi stuff people say. Anton Burke was pulled in last week because of Papa. They beat him up bad before they let him go — and he was lucky.”
	“But what can you do? You can’t stop him, Jurgen.”
	“I know. But maybe I can make up for what he does.” He turns toward me. “I’ve volunteered as a border pilot, Kari. I know these mountains. I can guide people on their first lap, the ones escaping to Sweden.”
	Please, God, not that!	“You can’t be serious, Jurgen. Think of what happened to Hans!” 			Hans Bengtsen, border pilot, tortured before they shot him. Only a month ago.
	“I know. I know. But listen, Kari, I’ll never make a soldier — I’m no Erik. This is something I can do.”
	“What about your father? What if he finds out?”
	He shrugs his shoulders. “I can’t watch him turn people in to the Nazis. I’ve been afraid of him for too long, Kari. I can’t go on like that.”
	Sweet Jurgen. His butcher father’s always been a loud mouthed bully. Jurgen’s been terrified of him for as long as I can remember, long before the German’s showed up. Now there’s the shame of being a collaborator’s son.
	Gentle Jurgen. Ready to take on the Nazis — and his monster of a father, which may be worse. I put my arms around my friend. We stand there in the snow, in the pale sun, wrapped in forest silence.
	I was wrong. Peace is an illusion. 
	There is no escape from the war — not here, not anywhere.   	
 					Chapter 16
					 JURGEN
	Jurgen pauses, cleaver in mid air above the pig carcass.
	She’d put her arms around him — and he’d  let her and it was like she had no idea what that did to him, how cruel she was, her mouth inches away from his, no idea how hard it was to keep from doing something stupid, like pulling her close, kissing that mouth he dreams about, daydreams about, no idea how hard it was to come up with something, anything dumb to say to keep from telling her he isn’t that little kid she’s grown up with, not anymore, that he’s a man now. that he'd do anything for her.
	That his heart is hers, if only she’d take it.
	How can she be so blind? She has to see it in his eyes, how much he loves her, has loved her for as long as he has memories. It’s too damn exhausting — acting like nothing’s changed since nursery school, like they’re still just skiing buddies, best friends. It’s wearing him out. 
	 And it’s  hopeless. He knows that. The way she looks at Erik. How could he ever compete with every girl’s dream? 
	Jurgen raises the cleaver and brings it down on the carcass, splitting the hip joint of the pig. He’s just as strong as Erik, but a butcher kind of strong, short and sturdy, just perfect for the job he hates! He swings the cleaver again, hard enough to make the single bulb hanging above him dance, hard enough to make his shadow bounce off the hanging carcasses waiting for his knife. 
					Chapter 9
					   KARI
	  The stamping of snowy boots outside the front door. I race to the door, swing it wide and Papa gathers us in his arms. Finally! I inhale the snell of fish and cigarettes and freezing air — Papa smells. Tiny icicles on his beard and mustache tickle. Mama and I are laughing in relief, the worry that’s gripped us melting like the snow sliding off his oilskin. We can breathe again. He’s home. Safe from the sea and the winter storm and the Nazi patrols always on the lookout for his little boat. Safe.
	Until the next time.
	Papa strips off layers of damp wool and Mama pours cups of herb tea. He pulls a small packet from an inside pocket and hands it to her, grinning.
	“Sugar! Oh, Henrik!” She closes her eyes, kisses the package, and plants another kiss on Papa’s cheek. “You’re a day late. What happened? We were so worried! So was Otto. He was here just before curfew.”
	“Blame the North Sea in November. Weather even worse in the Shetlands than here — gale force winds so strong we couldn’t leave Scalloway harbor. Then, six hours out, the engine quits. Sven got us going again, thank God. At least the damn weather kept the Germans from hunting us.”
	“Passengers?”Mama asks.
	“Picked up two this time, neither of them good sailors. Sea sick the whole way.”
	I don’t ask questions. The less I know the safer I’ll be, according to Papa. But I know enough. He’s been at it for months, ferrying passengers and equipment to and from Norway and every time we say goodbye it’s like it could be for the last time — could be the last hug, the last kiss, the last sight of him. 
	“Kari, Otto needs to know we’re back safe,” Papa says.
	I’m already pulling on my boots.
	“And he needs this.” Papa hands me the usual envelope, the one for Mr. Knudsen after   each of these trips. The envelopes contain new codes for the Knudsen’s absolutely illegal radio transmitter, a death penalty if the Germans find it.  
 	“Be careful, love,” Mama says.
	I have my story ready just in case. Mama’s sick and I’m fetching Mrs. Knudsen who’s a nurse. It’s not a great story, but how likely is it there’ll be any patrols out in this weather at three in the morning.    
	It’s pitch black once the door closes behind me. The wind’s hurling snow that stings my face, but snow and wind are good — my tracks won’t last long. 
	It’s not far. There’s a sliver of light under their front door. They’re still up, just as worried as we’ve been. I bang on the door.
	“Who’s there?” It’s Mr. Knudsen.
	“Kari Jensen,” I say.
	The click of locks being undone. The door opens. His worried face searches mine.
	“It’s alright,” I say. “He just got back. They left late because of the weather in the Shetlands. Then the engine gave out, but Sven fixed it.”
	“Thank God!” His face relaxes. 
	“Who is it, Otto?” Mrs. Knudsen’s voice calls.
	“It’s Kari, Rachel. Henrik is back. Come in and get warm, girl.”
	“No. I’m alright. They’ll be waiting for me.” I hand him the envelope and head  into the storm. The door closes, locks click into place. Maybe locks make them feel safer, but it’s hardly worth bothering. No lock can protect you from the Germans. 
					

	I head home from school. It’s been dark for hours and I’m looking forward to a crackling fire, maybe some rose hip tea. When I open the door I can’t believe my eyes. Mama’s at the kitchen table unravelling my red sweater, the one she made for my last birthday! 
	“Mama, what are you doing? That’s my favorite sweater!”
	“Come and sit down Kari. There’s no red yarn left in the shops and I can get four hats out of this sweater.”
	Then I understand. She’s been talking about red hats for days, about how all of Norway is making them as a symbol of resistance to the Nazis after they banned cards showing the Christmas elf in his pointy red hat waving a Norwegian flag. 
	“Our knitting group’s pledged twenty five hats. I’m sorry about the sweater, Kari, but this is important. Each of us has to do whatever we can. Your father has his ‘Shetland taxi.’ I can knit.” 
	And me? What can I do?
	
					Chapter 10
					  KARI
	 December 13  —  the feast of Santa Lucia. I’m up extra early.
	I close the lid on the kitchen stove, muffling the crackle and pop of flaming kindling, and set the coffee pot on top. That’ll take a while, plenty of time for me to transform into Santa Lucia. I slip the white robe over my nightgown and tie the red sash around my waist. The Lucia crown is on the table, ready for its candles. I practice singing her song.
	Svart senker natten seg
	I stall og stue
	Solen har got sin vei
	Skkyggene truer 
	The Lussekatter buns are golden with saffron. I put my nose close and inhale the aroma of cardamon before I arrange them on the tray. Real wheat flour, spices, raisons! Such luxuries! All thanks to Lotte’s mom.  I didn’t ask where she got them.
	So strange, how a martyred Sicilian virgin ended up a symbol of light and hope in a land so far away, but this time of year, after months of dark with more to come, we always look forward to her promise of light. Normally we’d have elected a Santa Lucia to lead a procession of choirs and children through the town. And in normal times it would have been Anna. Everyone knew she’d be next. But there won’t be a procession, not this year, one more precious thing the Nazi’s have forbidden, and even if there were, with her German boyfriend it wouldn’t have been Anna.
 	 But behind blackout curtains all across Trondheim there are daughters just like me, getting ready to wake their parents with Lucia’s song, and this year it feels more important somehow, like it’s more than a pretty tradition, like it’s a promise to ourselves that the Nazi dark and despair won’t last forever, that light will return. 
	The delicious aroma of real coffee fills the kitchen. I breathe it in, light the four candles on my holly-decked crown and lift it to my head. A tingle runs through me. The brass crown is a treasure, handed down from my great grandmother. What I do next is what she’d have done  more than a hundred years ago.
	The tray is ready.
	I step into the dark, singing.  
					   Chapter 11
				                 ANNA
	She  can’t sleep. Anna gets out of bed, goes to her closet and feels for the bag hidden at the very back, hidden from Mama and Papa who must not know about the coat and how it came to be hers. The thought of them finding out stops her for a moment, but only for a moment. There’d be a beating, for sure. But they won’t find it, she’ll make sure of that.
	 A trill of anticipation as she lifts the fabulous red coat out of its bag and holds it up, admires each detail — the stand-up collar, the way it flares at the bottom, the brass buttons stamped with some kind of crest. She holds it to her cheek, feels how soft it is before she slips her bare arms into sleeves lined with slippery satin that make her shiver.
	Anna turns to the mirror hung on her closet door and poses, smiling at her reflection. The red of the coat sets off her blond curls and adds its own rosiness to her complexion. She turns slowly, admiring her image from every angle. She’s never dreamt of owning anything so beautiful. If only she could share the news of the coat with someone. With Kari. With Lotte. But that won’t happen. They aren’t speaking to her.
	Not since Lieutenant Fritz Schneider.
	Today he’d taken her to Knudsen’s Dry Goods and picked out the red coat, her Christmas present. He’d asked her to put it on, to turn in front of him. He’d laughed as she blushed and giggled and told her she was beautiful. 
	The Anker hotel! Fritz has booked a room for tomorrow, told her to meet him there after work, and she’d said yes. Anna knows why he’s booked the room. Blood rushes to her face at the thought of it. Lieutenant Fritz Schmidt — stunning in his uniform. What will he look like when he strips it off? She’s hot and cold all at the same time, can’t allow herself to picture what will happen next, has only the foggiest idea, really.
	She hugs the red coat close before she takes it off, refolds it carefully, and hides it in the back of her closet.
				               Chapter 12
					     KARI	   
	Christmas. Almost here. Our first since the invasion. It used to be my favorite time of the year, candles in every window, on every table, perched on the boughs of the tree fresh cut by Papa and me, its sharp woodsy perfume mingling with smells wafting  from the kitchen. Mama baking her cookies  — always at least seven varieties. Mama and her sweet bread speckled with candied fruits. And always  that half barrel of Papa’s special dried cod soaking outside the back door ready for big platters of lutefisk drenched in butter.
	Not this year.
	There should be kids and grownups singing carols outside our door, waiting to be invited in for plates of Mama’s cookies. Glogg should be warming on the kitchen stove, spiced with cinnamon and cardamom and cloves, ready for the knock on the door, ready for neighbors and friends who just happen to be passing by.
	Not this year. Ration coupons don’t even cover wheat flour let along candied fruit and spices.
	I should have already been to Knudsen’s Dry Goods a few times, struggling to figure out how  to  make the kronor I’ve saved stretch to pay for a silk scarf for Mama, a blue one for sure, and a fancy carved pipe for Papa, and something for Lotte. I should be dropping hints at home about a new pair of skates to replace the old ones that pinch my toes.
	Not this year. Even if we had the money to buy them, the stores are almost empty. German soldiers have bought up everything to send to Germany. No scarf for Mama. No pipe for Papa. Definitely no skates for me.   
	Even worse. It’s like they’ve rationed laughter and joy. And trust. That too.

	Five o’clock Christmas Eve. The bells are right on time. They come from all directions, calling people to church. The snow started mid-afternoon, by four it was so heavy we gave up our plan to go to the cathedral service. So no big choir, no booming organ that gives you chills, but we can walk to Ranheim Church —  even ski if we have to, and I’m thinking this year, this special night, it’s better to be with people we know. 
	Not a Nazi in sight all the way to the service, the snow coming down so hard it’s even keeping the Germans off the streets. We share hugs and greetings with neighbors and friends streaming into the church, lots of them wearing red hats like ours. We sit with Lotte and Mr. and Mrs. Olsen. I  turn and see Anna with her parents in the back row. I hesitate before I wave. She’s staring right at me but she doesn’t wave back. That hurts. Oh Anna. Is one German soldier worth throwing away all the years we share?
	The service begins, the church candle-lit, not blazing with hundreds like it used to be before the Germans, but I love how each candle forms its own small pool of light in the dimness. I breathe in the scent of pine from the huge Christmas tree near the altar. My shoulders relax. We listen to the familiar readings I know by heart — promises fulfilled, hope, new life and I feel the tension the I carry every day let go. We sing the Christmas hymns I love. I’m so glad we’re in this place, surrounded by familiar faces. It feels safe. It’s so good to feel safe.
	“Glade Jul, heilige Jul.” Silent night, holy night. Ranheim Church fills with the hymn that always ends the Christmas Eve service. Papa’s booming voice next to me, not quite on key, makes me smile

	We step from the church into snow falling even faster than before, coming straight down now, fine and powdery. It’s already erased our footprints outside the church and made pillowy mounds of the gravestones in the churchyard.
	“God Jul,” Lotte says. She hands me a tiny package. I open it. Inside is her beautiful  heart-shaped locket. I’m stunned!
	“No. You shouldn’t have!” 
	“I know you’ve always loved it. It’s yours now,” Lotte says. “And, Kari, it’s from Erik, too. Open it.”
	I do. Erik’s face smiles up at me from the tiny heart-shaped photo.
	“Oh, Lotte!” It’s all I get out. I’m choking up
	“He sends word, Kari. He wanted to be here to help me give you the locket.”
	 I know I’ll start crying if I try to say something. I swallow hard and hand her my gift — the drawing I made last fall of Lotte and her mare Saga soaring over a log in the forest.
	She unwraps it and throws her arms around me.
	“It’s perfect. I love it!”
	We stand in all that white, faces raised to the powdery flakes pouring out of the sky, falling on eye lashes and laughing mouths. It finally feels like Christmas.
	On a normal Christmas there’d be candles in every window throwing pools of light into the darkness. Not now, not with the blackout and every window covered. But the snow creates a light of its own.
	We’re close to  home, but I hardly recognize the familiar shapes — the post box on the corner, the fence around the Janssen’s yard — every angle’s rounded, softened. The snow’s almost to the top of my knee-high rubber boots, slowing me down. Skis would have been a really good idea.
	“What’s this?” Papa’s plowing through the drifts a few steps ahead of Mama and me. “What in God’s name?”
	A shape almost covered by snow.  It moves, groans
	Mama bends over it, brushing away the white powder. An arm! A German uniform!  My stomach spasms like I’m going to be sick.
	“Drunk,” Papa says. “Leave him. Let his own take care of him.”
	“Henrik, don’t be ridiculous. There’s no one else around. We can’t leave him here.” She brushes away more snow, revealing a leg, a black boot.
	“He’s German, Birgit!”
	“Yes, and it’s Christmas, or has that slipped your mind?” She has one of his arms. “Help me, Henrik, Kari!”
	Together we hoist the snow covered body, Papa on one side and me on the other. We half carry, half drag him to the door Mama’s holding open and into the heat of the kitchen. We lower him to a chair next to the stove. Papa brushes snow from his uniform. It sizzles as it hits the stove top.
	My heart stops. The German’s eyes are closed — but that face! I recognize it! It’s the youngest of the three soldiers, the one who kept his friends from cutting off my other braid — or worse. The horror of that day washes over me. I start shaking. This can’t be happening!
	Mama unbuttons his coat. Her hand goes to his forehead. Another groan.
	“He’s burning up!” she says. She bends over him and sniffs. “He’s not drunk, he’s sick.” She turns to Papa. “Henrik, go for Rachel Knudsen. Tell her about the fever. She’ll know what to do.”
	“No. I’ll go,” I say. I’m hyperventilating, dizzy. I have to get out of here. 
	“Well, hurry,” Mama says. “Henrik, help me get him to the cot in the storeroom.”
	Back out into the storm. Wind gusting, snow stinging my face as I strap on my skis.
	The images are there. I can’t make them go away.  The sweaty face of the fat German, inches away, the stink of his breath, the feel of his belly pressed against me, the sound of the knife sawing through my braid!
	Ski. Ski fast through the blinding snow.
	I bang on the Knudsen’s door. No answer. I try again. Ilse opens it, eyebrows raised. No greeting. “Yes?” is all she says.
	“I need to speak to your mother,” I say.   
	She turns away. “Mama, it’s Kari Jensen.” 
	Mrs. Knudsen appears from their sitting room. “Kari, what is it? Is something wrong?”
	I tell her about the German. A look of fear crosses her face, but she doesn’t hesitate.
	 “Let me get my bag,” she says.  
					Chapter 13
					   KARI
	“Thank goodness you’re here, Rachel.” Mama says, taking Mrs. Knudsen’s coat. “His temperature is over 102 but he’s shaking with chills even under three layers of quilts. At least he’s conscious now.”
	I stand outside the storeroom listening. Will he recognize me? What if he says something about Midsommar, about the braid? What will Papa do? That can’t happen. I shiver like it’s me with the chills.
	Mama goes to the kitchen to get broth. Mrs. Knudsen is rummaging through her bag. I force myself to step into the storeroom. That hated grey uniform. In our house! Papa’s fishing gear and our winter coats hang from hooks on the wall. Mama’s canning equipment, extra mixing bowls, and our few precious jars of raspberry jam from last summer fill the shelves. This German, this uniform, taints these objects, taints our lives just by being in the storeroom. I hate him for that!
	His eyes open. He startles when they focus on me and his pale face goes red. He remembers! I force myself to hold his gaze, raise my hand and stroke what’s left of my hair. Slowly I shake my head. Don’t say anything. Please, don’t say anything! I try to force the words into his brain. Does he get it? Is he too sick to understand? He stares at me, then closes his eyes. Mama’s back and I don’t know. I don’t know!
	“He has all the symptoms of pneumonia," Mrs. Knudsen says. “This aspirin should help the fever, but I’m down to my last few sulfapyridine tablets.” She hands them to Mama. “He’ll need all of them to fight the infection — and liquids and nourishment, as much as you can get into him, Birgit.” She shakes her head. “Just a boy -- even if he is German.”
	“Christmas Eve. At least we have some real food to feed him,” Mama says.
	She’s right. Yesterday Lotte sent a ham home with me, and enough cream to make rice pudding — food we haven’t tasted forever. All afternoon I’ve been smelling that ham roasting in the oven, dying for that first bite. Feed that precious ham to this German?
	“You were so kind to come out in the midst of your Hanukkah celebration, Rachel,” Mama says. “Thank you!”
	“Well, you’ve had quite a start to your Christmas Eve, too.” 
	They give each other a hug and I let Mrs. Knudsen out into the night. Mama sits beside the German, spooning broth into his mouth. I can’t stand to watch. There’s a dish of rice pudding on the table beside the cot. I want to snatch it away. The thought of even one precious grain of rice going into that mouth makes me gag.
				                  Chapter 14
					    ANDREAS
	Andreas stands at the top, peering down the ski jump’s precipitous slope, steeper than anything he’s ever seen. He’s next. The giant crimson swastika hanging behind him snaps in the breeze. Crowds line the slope — Norwegians — pointing up at him, jeering, screaming, faces ugly with hate. His skis project over the lip of the jump. The countdown starts. Ten. Nine. Eight. He isn’t ready. Knees won’t bend, arms glued to his sides. He can barely breathe. Seven. Six. Five. The crowd’s shouts grow louder. He tries to step back, but claw-like hands pinch his shoulders, pushing him toward the edge, pushing him toward the screaming crowd below. Four. Three. Two. A final push. His mouth opens to scream.
 	“Wake up, Corporal.”
	The deep voice pulls him from deep down, from the depths of the nightmare. Andreas opens his eyes, closes them again against the too bright light, his body still quivering from the dream. He squints, taking in a room full of beds like his, filled with bodies like his. The camp hospital — a smoking wood stove in the corner, the astringent smell of disinfectant, murmurs of conversation, moans. Drafty, but warmer than the barracks.
	He pushes himself back against the iron bed frame and sits up, remembering. The fever, the woman with the kind eyes hovering over him, urging him to eat. What? Rice pudding. The memory of that taste lingers in his mouth — creamy, sweet with sugar and cinnamon. For an instant he’d been home again and this was his mother’s rice pudding.
	Andreas shakes himself. He is very far from home among people who despise him. This is Norway, not the Rhineland. 
	“Take these.” The orderly places two tablets on Andreas’ palm and hands him a cup of water.
 	There had been that girl standing there, the one from Midsommar with the chopped off braid, staring at him, fear and hatred on her face. It’s the look he gets every day — the look he can’t get used to. It could have been worse. He knows that. He could have been sent to the Eastern front like Lothar and Gerhard. Not many come back from the Eastern front.
 	Andreas Bauer puts the pills in his mouth. It takes two gulps of water to make them go down. They leave a bitter taste. The sweetness of rice pudding is only a memory. But when he closes his eyes that kind face is still there.
	Norwegians saved his life.
	   
				         1941
					Chapter 17
					  KARI
	The 10km cross country race. A hundred of us at the starting line. The forecast — cloudy and cold. Fine with me. Cold keeps the powder fresh and fast. The first flakes start to fall as the starter’s gun goes off, lazy fat flakes take their time as they spill from the overcast sky. All hundred of us charge toward the forest. We’re bunched up, jockeying for position. That’ll change as soon as we get to Helmut’s Hill. I’m about  middle of the pack. I herringbone my way to the top, passing half a dozen skiers, including Jurgen, and the mountain and valley spread out in front of me, hazy as the snow falls faster. I push off, gaining speed on the downslope, the flakes stinging my face. I tuck to follow the curve of the mountain. My skis meet the fresh fall and fly around the bend in the trail, half buried in powder. 
	Total white now. I ski through a milky world of silence, the only sound the whisper of my skis as I plummet down the hill, faster, ever faster, my body flowing, knees, ankles, arms, shoulders all in motion, feeling the give and go of new snow, loving it. I  bend to the mountain, crouch low, arms and poles tucked close and the snow and I are one as we touch and taste and feel each other. I swim through this ocean of white. I want so bad to stay in this world of no Germans— pure, unscarred by boots and guns and tanks and fear. This world where I am not afraid. 
	Less than a kilometer to go and I’m on my own. Only one more hill to the finish line and I’m still strong. My best race ever. Use poles. Dig in. Go faster. I barrel down the slope, picking up momentum to start up the last hill, the steepest one of all.
	And then I hear it.
	The schuss schuss of other skis coming up behind me. I glance over my shoulder. A shape’s approaching through snow that’s falling faster and faster — and the shape is gaining on me.
	I start to herringbone my way up the last hill but I hear the crunch of skis right behind me now. Breath’s coming in gasps. I glance back. My pursuer’s right there.
	 A German uniform!
	No! He will not pass me!
	We’re side by side, matching strides and then he’s pulling ahead. I dig down, pull the last bit of strength the last bit of breath from the deepest place. The finish line‘s right there. The German uniform inches past me.
	I have nothing left.
	Our eyes lock. It’s him! The one they call Andreas. The one from Midsommar. The one from Christmas.
	Then he falls back. I’m in the lead again and I cross the finish line. For sure he had me — and he let me win. I collapse on a snow bank, sucking air into my longs, every muscle quivering.
	He let me win. A German let me win.
	This is not the world I live in, where black is black and white is white and there is no in-between. My mind’s a mess of jumbled thoughts and images and it hurts as much as my aching muscles.
	Nothing fits like it should.
					Chapter 18
					   KARI							
	Last night’s blizzard left the edges of everything softened with puffs of white, like the whole town is covered in mounds of whipped cream. Frosty cold air, but no wind, so it doesn’t bite. I strap on my skis and take the long way through the woods to Lotte’s farm. Ten a.m. The sun barely above the horizon, throwing blue shadows across the trail. The schuss, schuss of my skis the only sound in all this silence. I breathe it in.
	Lotte’s in the tack room warming up by the pot bellied stove. 
	“You’re late,” she says. “An exciting Saturday night after your big win?”
	“Not really. Mama let me sleep in for a change after the race.”
	“Lucky you. I fed the horses. Time for turn out.”
	I follow her into the barn. We’re greeted by hoof stamping and the nickering of six  golden Fjords, impatient for what they know happens next. We open stall doors and they charge past us, out into knee-deep snow, chasing each other, bucking and rearing, snorting, blowing, their warm breath turned to  steam in the frigid air, making us laugh at their antics. Then comes the part I love best. Bruni and two others are on their backs, rolling in the snow, making horsey snow angels. 
	“Time to get to work,” Lotte says. I follow her into the barn, get a wheel barrow, and start cleaning stalls — my weekly payment for riding privileges. Six cleaned stalls later we take a break to warm up in the tack room. 
	I have to know.
	“Have you heard from Erik?”
	Lotte grins. “I was wondering when you’d ask. He sent word. He made it to Sweden. “
	He’s safe! What a relief! Skiing to Sweden is no joke, even with guides.
	“They let him join the other Norwegian trainees,” says Lotte. “But first they interrogated him for two whole days to make sure he wasn’t a German spy. Can you believe it? Papa didn’t want him to go. He and Erik had a big fight, right before he left, a real yelling match. Of course that didn’t stop Erik.”
	At least he’s alright for now. I’d seen it coming ever since the invasion. He was so restless, especially after he heard from his cousin about training with Norwegian volunteers, about hand grenades, dynamite, sten guns, Molotov cocktails. 
	“He left something for you.” Lotte pulls a rumpled envelope out of her jacket pocket and waves it at me. I grab the precious envelope.
	“I didn’t even try to open it.” She gives me a shoulder poke. “You aren’t going to read it to me?” 
	 I put it in my knapsack. “Let you know if there’s a message for you.”
	“Sure you will,” she says with a chuckle.
	We finish the stalls and put out flakes of hay. By now the horses are standing at the barn door, ready to come in. Normally I’d look forward to joining Lotte and her parents for lunch. What they raise on the farm is a lot better than what Mama can put together with ration coupons. But not today. All I can think of is the envelope in my knapsack.
	We give each other a hug and I head for home, the sun an orange ball sitting on the horizon making the snow glow pink. It’ll be dark by 2:30. Halfway through the woods I stop and tear open the envelope.
	“Dear Kari,
	This is goodbye for a while.  Sorry I have to leave in a hurry. You know I’ll be thinking about you, wondering what you’re doing, listening for your laugh, remembering our last time together, how you felt in my arms. That should  keep me warm all the way to Sweden!
	No time to write more. Pray for me. 
	Your Erik”
	The sun’s sunk below the horizon leaving an orange glow that won’t last long. I put the letter back in its envelope. When will I see him again? I miss him so much, but I wish he could stay in Sweden, safe from the Germans. He’ll be back with all his new skills and if he’s caught .  .  . what they’ll do to him to make him talk. Tarald Gustavsen. Just last week. He jumped from the fourth floor of Gestapo headquarters at the Mission Hotel. He and Papa were friends, he’d crewed on Papa’s boat, knew what it was used for but he didn’t talk. Tarald saved Papa’s life. It cost him his own.
	Where does that sort of courage come from? Where is mine? Fear, nightmares, muscles that seize up just passing the Germans on the street. Erik, Papa, Sven, Jurgen, Tarald and all the others. Doing their part. And me? 
	Coward is an ugly word.
	I push off, focus on my pumping muscles, my breath coming in gasps as I herringbone up the hill, crouch low over my skis, hurtle, reckless, down the other side, frigid air stinging my face, trying to out ski that word.  
					Chapter 19
					  LOTTE
	It’s her leg again. Winter cold and damp always set it off. Mostly she can ignore it, but it’s woken her up these past two nights. Aspirin would help — if there were any. But the  German thieves have confiscated that, too. Lotte rubs the ache, not that it really helps. 
	 She stops her rubbing. Four years ago. 
	 They’d thought maybe it was just another winter flu, same old sore throat, fever, muscle aches. But it didn’t go away. The pain got much worse . Her muscles spasmed and twitched and then the tingling sensations all over. Mama and Papa frantic, not wanting to admit it was the dread disease with no cure. What if it paralyzed her breathing muscles like it did to Ella — they’d put her in that iron lung that breathed for her, but there weren’t enough iron lungs to go around. Ella was one of the lucky ones. 
	They’d prayed and prayed and little by little her symptoms went away, but not before the virus left her with an ugly deformed foot and a leg that wouldn’t work. Pain and aches came and went. The doctors said the leg would never let her walk. Well, what they hadn’t figured on was how tough she was. Or what a best friend could do. They hadn’t figured on Kari. She’d been there every single day urging Lotte on when she was near giving in to the pain and how impossible it was to put one foot in front of the other. Kari had been sure she could do it, yelling at her, challenging her, making her mad, making her laugh. Kari had kept her from giving in.
	They’d proved the doctors wrong.		 
	Lotte dangles her feet over the edge of the bed. Her toes touch the icy floor of the unheated bedroom and she smiles, grateful for that sensation of cold — in both feet. She pulls on the thick socks made by Mama, her Christmas present, and forces her foot into the special shoe. Too small for months. No way there’ll be a new one, not until this disaster of a war is over.
	She catches a glimpse of herself in the bedroom mirror and grimaces. Solid,  muscular, lacking curves. Hopeless. Not the sort of figure to lure Sven away from the flashy redhead she’s seen him with. Lotte adds more layers to keep out the cold before a final look in the mirror. Whatever curves she has have disappeared under long johns, a turtle neck and two sweaters.
	Oh, well. She’s warm.
	It’s still dark, only the faintest traces of grey on the horizon. Lotte smells the ersatz coffee as she treads the stairs, holding onto the railing. They’re all in the kitchen, Mama, Papa, Great Aunt Helga,  involved in the business of feeding themselves. Breakfast used to be something to look forward to. No more. The eggs Mama’s chickens lay are too precious to waste on the family. They pay for whatever leftovers they can still find in the mostly empty shops. Same with milk from the herd. At least Mama allows enough on the tasteless porridge to help it go down. 
	They look up when she comes into the kitchen. Papa gives her a nod, Mama a smile. Great Aunt Helga stares at her as usual, struggling to remember who Lotte is before going  back to her porridge. The only one missing is Erik, his chair empty. No-one mentions his name these days and there’s that ping of anger deep inside when she thinks of how quick he’d been to join the resistance, how quick to escape the farm and leave her to do double the work, how much he’d hurt Mama and Papa. But she understands. Erik was never meant to be a farmer, could never love this place the way she does.
	She misses him so much.
	Lotte looks around the table and sighs. There are tension lines on Papa’s face. His arthritis acting up again. Mama helps as much as she can, but without Erik Lotte does the heavy lifting, and farm work doesn’t stop just because you’re in pain.
	Lotte swallows the last bite of  porridge and  heads to the barn. Every one of the Fjords nickers at the sight her and her heart lifts like it does every morning. Mostly they want their breakfast, but it’s more than that. These are her babies, raised from foals, trained, gentled until they’re safe enough for the beginning riders who used to flock to the farm. Not so many these days. There’s no money for such luxuries. The few who still come get free lessons because the Fjords need the exercise and Lotte loves to teach, loves to watch fear turn to love on those small faces as they bond with the patient Fjords. 
	Hooves batter the stall walls at the far end of the barn making Lotte smiles. Saga. No patience there. The mare shakes her head, snorting, demanding her breakfast. Lotte opens the stall door and the mare nudges her chest with a velvet snout before ripping a mouthful from the flakes of hay she carries. 
	Saga. Rescued from the knacker’s knife when no one could ride the three-year-old devil mare. Saga. Her dream, her hope, her sure ticket to the national show jumping team — before the damned war! Will it ever end? And if it does will there still be a country to compete for? Or will Norway be just another German province under the Nazi boot?
	Germans or no Germans, this creature is what keeps her going. Not that it’s been easy — all those months to earn her trust, but it's paid off. Now Saga sees a jump as something to conquer, meets every challenge Lotte sets for her. She doesn’t tell Mama or Papa about the crazy adventures the two of them have, what happens on the training rides into the mountains to build the mare’s stamina — the impossible chasms they jump, the swollen rivers they ford, the avalanche that almost got them.  The mare’s courage is amazing — and on her back a polio-shortened leg doesn’t matter at all.
	On her back she’s whole again.  
					Chapter 20
					   ERIK
	The plane bucks and heaves. So does Erik’s stomach, but there’s nothing left to vomit. He lost his dinner an hour after take off from the Scottish airfield.
	His first real jump. Only two practice jumps under his belt and those in broad daylight, under sunny skies, nothing like this pitch black midnight in the middle of a blizzard. And this is a blind drop — no-one on the ground to guide them. They’ve criss-crossed the landing area for fifteen minutes looking for an opening in the clouds. Another five minutes and they’ll have to abort. All that preparation for nothing.
	So much to learn. How to kill — if he has to. His hand goes to his vest pocket, feeling for the small lethal knife. Training on the Colt .45 and .38. That had gone fine, but the damned Sten gun; none of them thought it was reliable. Sabotage, demolition and explosives — how to blow up a rail line or anything else. He’d been good at that. And all the spy stuff — codes, invisible ink, picking a lock, holding a cover story, avoiding surveillance, resisting interrogation.
	It all better be in there somewhere, in his brain, in his muscle memory, if he's going to stay alive. His blond hair’s chestnut brown now, parted in the middle, not brushed straight back like always, and with the thick rimmed glasses he’s supposed to wear he hardly recognizes himself.
	Mama, Papa, Lotte? Were they still even speaking to him? He’d left in a rush, Papa yelling at him, forbidding him to go. Of course they were scared, they knew how dangerous it was. But it was more than that — the blowup had been building for months, for years, really, because he’s no farmer, will never be a farmer. Because he hates the life, the endless drudgery that never changes. Because he has to find what’s out there in the world waiting for him. 
	Then the invasion, the Nazis, the resistance — and he’d finally known.
	The co-pilot is out of his seat, making his way toward him, grabbing at anything he can to keep his balance.
	“Found a hole in the clouds. We’re going in.” He hands Erik a thermos.
	“Your pre-jump cocktail. Drink up.”
	Hot toddy. Meant to calm his nerves and his stomach, give him a boost of Dutch courage. At least that’s what they’d said at the final briefing. He takes the thermos, unscrews the top and lifts it to his mouth. Rum fumes rush up his nostrils, give a jolt to his brain. He drinks. It goes down hot and rough, hits his empty stomach and spreads fire through his limbs. Maybe they were right. Maybe it’ll work. 
	Kari. He has to see her, if only long enough to hold her. He’d waited too long to let her know, afraid she’d laugh at him, not understand how a guy who’d always been more like an annoying big brother wanted to be something else. Wrong to wait, wrong to worry. She had understood, even told him how she’d dreamed of being in his arms. 
	So little time to feel the rush when she took his hand. So little time to feel what happened when she kissed him. 
	Silence. The pilot’s cut the engines. The plane slows, starts a steep descent to 400 feet to avoid German radar. Pressure builds in his ears. He coughs. Soon the co-pilot will hitch the static line of Erik’s parachute to the hook and open the hatch. Soon the red light will come on and he’ll sit, legs dangling over the edge of the abyss, focussing on the red light, waiting for it to turn green. 
	Fifteen seconds from jump to landing — barely enough time for the parachute to open. His mouth has gone dry, his empty stomach churns. The co-pilot unlatches the fuselage opening. Freezing air hits him like a blow.
	“Two minutes to drop,” the co-pilot says. “Remember, avoid the slipstream — go out straight.”  
	Erik slides his body toward the black hole and eases his legs over the edge. 
	“Thirty seconds.” The red light flashes. “Ten, nine, eight, seven.  .  .”
	The light is green.
	“Go!”
	Free fall. Then the blessed jerk as the static line opens the chute and Erik hangs suspended, drifting slowly — until the ground is right there, rushing up at him.	
		      			Chapter 21
					    KARI 	
 	A full moon’s hovering over the trees, lighting the trail through the woods to Lotte’s birthday party. Her gift‘s in my rucksack, finished by Mama yesterday — a dark blue sweater with white snowflakes around the neck. You’d never know the yarn came from unraveling Papa’s old sweater. There’s no yarn at Knudsen’s Dry Goods these days. No gift wrap either, of course, but Lotte won’t mind. She’ll love it. 
	The bonfire’s glow lights the trees and I glide down the last hill to the sound of shouts and laughing voices and the swish, swish of skates on glassy ice. Bjorn and Sylvia and Kirsten and Jacob are already out on the lake, more are on their way for sure because no one would miss one of the few parties we get to have these days. No worries about the 9 p.m. curfew, not tonight. We’re sleeping here — girls in the farmhouse, guys in the barn under hay and blankets. Lotte has to be disappointed that Sven’s off with Papa again, not here to help her celebrate her seventeenth birthday, but I know better than to mention it. She thinks I don’t know how she feels about him, but it’s pretty obvious —  the look on her face whenever he’s around, the change in her voice. You can’t hide stuff like that from your best friend. 
	“Kari!” Lotte’s seen me. I take off my skis, park them in a snow bank, and pull on my too-small skates. 
	“Happy Birthday, you!” I say. “Have a look in my rucksack.”
	Out comes the sweater. “Oh, Kari!” She holds it up, hugs it to her and pulls it over her head. “Thank you. Thank your mom. It’s perfect!”
	I glide out onto the lake, circling the bonfire, getting a feel for the ice. Tonight we’ll  pretend the world’s a normal place, that we’re just normal people enjoying what normal people enjoy for a change. I breathe in the sharp clean air, let my shoulders relax, let my skates propel me over ice so smooth and glassy it’s like nature froze it perfect just for us.
	I jump at the arm around my waist. 
	“Jurgen!”
	He laughs. “Come on. You can go faster than that.”
	We fly across the ice, our blades in sync, longer, faster strides, his arm guiding me. Almost at the far shore he spins us around and around and I’m dizzy and panting and laughing. He pulls me close. 
	“Jurgen, what are you doing?” I push away. He looks at me with that defeated look he gets. “We’re friends, remember, best friends?”
	“Right.” He pushes off, his skates punishing the ice.
	“Jurgen, come back! Don’t be like that.” 
	He doesn’t. I hate this. He knows how I feel and he knows how I don’t feel. I love him — as a friend. Why does he have to spoil it? I take my time following him back toward the fire. 
	Lotte’s filling mugs from a steaming pot suspended over the fire. The  delicious spicy perfume of glogg.
	“Wine? Where did that come from?” I ask.
	“Almost a miracle, isn’t it? Ilsa brought it — and there’s plenty.”
	“Ilsa? No. Tell me you didn’t invite her!”
	“I didn’t. Mama did — without asking me. Sorry, Kari.”
	 I skate away from the bonfire so I won’t say something stupid and spoil Lotte’s party. Ilse. Here. Damn! I force my mind to focus on what my feet are doing, start a spin, my body revolving faster and faster.
	Bam! I’m face down on the ice, the breath knocked out of me. I look up. It’s her!
	“Watch where you’re going,” Ilsa says.
	“Me?” I gasp. I can’t believe she said that.  I struggle to my feet. She skates away, all wobbly. I tell myself she didn’t do it on purpose, that she’s just a crappy skater, but myself doesn’t believe it. This is not the party I’ve been looking forward to.
	I push off. My skates cut into the mirrored surface. I pick up speed as I cross the lake, skating into the silence. 
	“Kari!”
	That voice! I twirl around. 
	“Erik?”
	He’s there in the shadows. Then his arms are around me and his mouth is on mine, his moon-washed face so beautiful and he’s kissing me, his body, so strong, pressed against me, holding me tight and nothing else matters and the night is perfect!
	We sit on a fallen log at the far edge of the lake.“You can’t tell anyone I’m here, Kari,” he says. “I can’t stay. I have a job to do, but I had to see you — just in case.”
	I want to tell him he can’t leave, not so soon, that I won’t let him go, but I don’t get a chance because his mouth is on mine taking me to that other place and when our lips finally part and we’re looking into each others eyes the pain of parting is all mixed up with so much longing and so much wanting and I hate, hate, hate this war that’s made so much impossible.					 			Chapter 22
					    ERIK
	He forces himself to let her go. He’d been crazy to come. He was late, should already be at the rendezvous. But the chance to see her — who knew, maybe for the last time if this whole thing was a disaster.
	Fingers of fear and doubt creep in, all the things that could go wrong. The moon’s too bright. You could read by it. They’ll be easy to spot. No wind. That‘s good, but it’s so damn cold. A tipped canoe and he won’t last five minutes, plus he’s only ever practiced attaching a limpet mine to a piece of metal — not to the side of a ship below the waterline. All the things he could screw up. His first mission. Do the others know? Will they see how scared he is? What if the fear gets to him, paralyzes him?
	No! Focus. Pull up all the stuff he’s learned. MK1 Limpet mines. Impossible to pry off, just like the tiny sea creatures they’re named for. They’ll explode if anyone even tries. He’s seen what they can do, the size of the hole they can blow in a piece of metal. But placing them below the water line with that five foot rod. So tricky and he hadn’t been that good at it. Tonight will be different. It has to be.
	He hears the sea before he sees it — the gentle rattle, the advance and retreat of the tide on the pebbled shore. And there’s Bjorn, probably not his real name, the only one of the three he’s met.
	“Your late, Thirty One,” Bjorn says. 
	“Sorry.” No excuses, no telling them he’d had to see the girl he was crazy about because what if that was the last time he’d hold her. 
	“Strap this on,” the tallest of the three says. Brusque. No introduction. He hands Erik a vest, four limpet mines attached to its back. They clamber into the two canoes and shove off into deeper water, heading south, heading for the target, the water glassy smooth. They’ll make good time with no waves to fight.
	Any other night and he’d notice how the moon makes a highway across the water, would enjoy the rhythmic dip and pull of his paddle. Not tonight. Every muscle, every thought is focused on speeding the canoe to the target. 
	It takes an hour. They round a promontory and there it is — the Chemnitz — only a supply ship, but full of ammunition. Sinking it will block the exit from the fjord. It isn’t a huge ship, but as they get closer it grows and grows until its gunmetal grey hull towers over their ant-like canoes. How can the puny charges he carries on his back take down such a monster? 
	“We’ll take the left, they’ll take the right,” Bjorn whispers. The canoe slides along the side of the Chemnitz until Bjorn raises his hand to stop paddling. “I’ll go first.”
	Erik keeps the canoe steady as Bjorn activates the fifteen minute timer on a Limpet, hooks it to the end of the pole and lowers it into the water. A dull thud as its magnets find the ship’s side. Three more thuds. Now it’s his turn.
	 Erik unstraps the vest, his hands shaking as he unfastens one of the Limpets. It falls from his grip with a clatter loud as a gun shot in the silence. 
	Bjorn glares. Erik reaches to retrieve the mine from the floor of the canoe. It lies in an inch of water, maybe two. A leak! The water‘s coming in fast. 
	Erik taps Bjorn on the arm and motions toward the floor of the canoe.  
	“Shit! We have to get out of here!” Bjorn hisses. They backstroke frantically away from the Chemnitz. The other canoe emerges from the ship’s shadow. “There’s a leak,” Bjorn says. “We’re taking on water. We have to get to shore!” 
	They’re already riding low, the canoe sluggish despite their desperate paddling. They have twelve minutes, twelve minutes to get as far from the exploding ship as possible. Twelve minutes before the icy fjord claims them.
	They aren’t going to make it.
	The second canoe pulls alongside.
	“Come on! Get in!”
	Hands reach for their canoe, try to hold it steady as Bjorn scrambles out of the sinking boat. Erik lunges, throws himself into the other canoe, nearly capsizing it, as the leaking vessel disappears beneath the black water with a sigh and a gurgle.	
	He lies there, gasping for breath. The two paddlers grunt with every stroke, struggling to propel the unbalanced, overloaded canoe to shore.
	Kari. Her name. His prayer. He says it over and over and over.
	Half way to shore. The first muffled explosion of the under water Limpets. A moment of silence before blinding light, before deafening blasts as munitions blow, one after the other, the shock waves lifting their canoe and  hurling them onto the shore. 
	Erik hears a groan through the ringing in his ears. It’s close. He tests arms and legs. They work. He turns over and the slicing pain in his shoulder makes him gasp. There’s Bjorn’s, lying on the rocks next to him, half covered by the twisted remains of the canoe. He groans again. Where are the other two?
	Erik pushes himself up on one elbow in time to see the Chemnitz go down, its hulk blazing.
	The roar of the flames, then the sizzle, as Norway’s waters claim the Chemnitz.
					Chapter 21
					  KARI
	The sinking of the Chimnitz. Celebration, everyone speculating, wondering who did it. But I know. It was Erik. That’s where he was headed the night of Lotte’s party. That’s where he was headed when he’d tried to tell me, when I hadn’t paid attention to his words — how he had to see me — just in case. Two days since the sinking and nobody knows where he is. Those words keep looping through my brain. I should have stopped him. I should have done anything to stop him!
	Dinner’s over. Moose stew I can’t eat. Normally Mama would nag me to take a few bites, but not tonight. She puts her hand on my shoulder and clears my plate without a word. Normally I’d be forbidden to ask Papa about the resistance. But this is different.
	“If you know anything about Erik you have to tell me. Please, Papa.”
	He looks at me a long moment and the pain in his eyes says it all and I don’t want to hear his answer but it’s too late to take back my question.
	“You have a right to know, Kari. Two of the men turned up, hurt bad. They don’t know what happened to Erik and the other one. I’m so sorry, lambkin.”
	“No!”.
	He comes around the table, about to give me a hug. If he does I know I’ll lose it and I won’t do that. I rush to my room and all I can do is say it over and over.
	No! No! No! 
				*		*		*

	Morning. Barely remembered nightmares. Mama’s after me about the porridge I’m not touching. A knock on the door. It opens before Mama can get there. Mrs. Knudsen rushes in, out of breath. 
	“Oh, Kari, I just came from Erik. He’s concussed. Bruises and cuts over most of  his body, but he’ll be alright. Dr. Neilson and I worked on the two of them most of the night. He said to tell you his last thoughts before the explosion were of you.”
	“Where is he? Tell me!”
	“At their farm. They’re moving him today. Worried about a German search.”
	“I have to go to him!” I’m pulling on my coat. 
	“No, Kari. It’s not safe for you — or for Erik.” She shakes her head. “I’ll never know how got the other one to the farm, hurt as he was. He saved his life.”
	My legs won’t hold me up. I collapse to my chair, too choked up for words. 
					Chapter 22
					  SVEN    
	Sven detaches the last rope holding the Nordlys to the Scalloway dock and tosses it onto the deck. He jumps aboard.
	“All set,” he shouts to Henrik. The boat pulls away and chugs out of the harbor. Clouds pass in front of the half moon doing its best to light the way home to Norway. He looks back on the receding town. He’ll miss having a full stomach every day, miss the other Norwegian trainees, friends now, miss hearing the heavy Scot's accent he’s finally been able to decipher. He’ll definitely miss Maureen. 
	Still, he’s impatient to shove the throttle all the way forward, hear the rumble of the  two powerful engines, fly across the 700 km of water separating him from home.
	He’s ready. Three months of radio operator training and a whole new vocabulary — attenuator, variable condenser, magnetic permeability, capacitor, inductor. 
	Sven runs his hands over the box holding the precious transceiver, a brand new Mk Paraset, before he wraps it in layers of tar paper and places it in the bottom of a crate meant to hold fish. The crate will hold fish before they reach port — enough to cover the transceiver, enough to hide it from prying eyes if they’re inspected when they dock. He doubts that will happen, but if they’re boarded during the crossing by Germans suspicious of a scruffy fishing boat out in the middle of the North Atlantic .  .  .
	 Sven descends the cabin’s narrow ladder. Three bunk beds, a hot plate bolted to a counter, a cupboard with minimal cooking gear, a toilet behind the frayed curtain. The Nordlys. So familiar. It’s like coming home.
	An hour out and the once calm North Sea shows what it can do in March. The boat pitches and rolls, the wind whistling through the lines.
	“Need your help,” Henrik calls and Sven joins him in the wheelhouse. “Take over.” he says and heads below for the harnesses through blinding sheets of rain. Henrick tugs the wheelhouse door open and hands him a harness. 
	“The line’s attached to the anchor,” he says, water streaming off his oilskin. “Hook up. We’re in for it.” 
	Sven clips on the harness and opens the wheelhouse door. “Have to secure the crate,” he says. 
	The rain’s coming down sideways now, and his flashlight’s useless. He’ll have to locate the crate by feel. Sven inches his way across the deck, the wind screaming, struggling to balance as the prow of the Nordlys rises, then plummets into the trough of a wave that breaks over them. It sweeps him off his feet. He slides down the deck and slams into the crate, gasping as pain shoots through his shoulder. At least he’s found it. Sven pulls the rope from under his slicker, grappling with the crate, hands shaky, tying knots he prays will hold. He secures it to a heavy krampon and fights his way back to the wheelhouse on the pitching deck.
	Henrick is struggling to keep the Nordlys at a 45 degree angle to waves determined to send them to the bottom. Sven says a “Thank you!” prayer for this captain who’s survived so many North Sea blows. But this one’s different. He’s never seen waves this size. He prays again. Please, please let Henrick get them through this one.
	 Sven takes the wheel to give Henrik a break, clutching it as the Nordlys climbs the slope of the next wave before plunging into its gully. Just as well he hasn’t eaten in hours.

	The waves, the wind, and the rain slowly retreat unveiling stars in their millions. The exhausted crew breakfast on brown cheese, knackebrod, and real coffee as strong as Sven can make it before they lower the nets. Time to go fishing. Can’t show up in Trondheim with an empty fishing boat.
	There it is, the coast of Norway, silhouetted against the star lit sky. A thrill runs through Sven, a surge of love that catches him off guard.
	This is no ordinary homecoming.
	He has a job to do, a part to play. If only he’s up to it.  
				      	Chapter 23
					  LOTTE
	“Come on, Sven, where are you?” Lotte says into the dark, though it’s only the horses to hear her. Fru Hest and Freya stamp their hooves, probably wondering what they’re doing harnessed, just standing there. Lotte stamps her feet too — the cold is seeping in.
	Mama gave her a look when she volunteered to take Sven to the summer cabin and Papa  chuckled. She’s never been that good at hiding her feelings — like the blush she can’t control whenever Sven’s name comes up. She’s pretty sure Kari knows, too. Maybe everyone but Sven knows. Soon she’ll be alone with him. She flushes at the thought, delighted, terrified, because what if she can’t think of a thing to say, or, more likely, what if she says something really stupid, or rattles on and can’t keep her mouth shut?	
	Where is he? The waiting isn’t helping. Lotte peers down the lane. Yes, finally, there he is, skiing toward her! What’s her heart doing, beating like it wants to leave her chest? 
	Sven unstraps the transmitter from the sled and lifts it into the sleigh. “I really appreciate this, Lotte. Sorry to drag you out so early.”
	“Oh, don’t be sorry,” she says, way too much enthusiasm in her voice. Stop it! Relax!
	They climb aboard. Lotte takes the reins and the team springs forward.
	Sven is full of stories of his time in Scotland, making her laugh as he demonstrates his   Scottish accent. Lotte starts taking normal breathes.  
	The horses strain up the final incline to the summer cabin. Sven unloads the transmitter while Lotte lights a whale oil lamp and unpacks the emergency provisions Mama put together — sticks of dried beef, cracker like knackebrod, jars of applesauce, packets of rose hip tea. She makes up the narrow cot while he goes for firewood from the stash out back.
	“Lotte, you have to see this,” he calls “Come out here.”
	She steps into the snow — into a wonderland of color!
	Nordlysit! The aurora. But brighter, more intense than she’s ever seen it. Purples and reds and greens and blues dance above them to their own music. They’re laughing at the impossibility of such a show and Sven says “Do you ever wonder what the Vikings made of all this? Bet they were they terrified, wondering what the gods were up to.”
	It’s awesome. It’s stunning. But all her longing is concentrated on Sven, right there, so close, and it’s all she can do to keep from reaching for him. His shoulder touches hers. He’ll turn to her any moment now. She can feel it. He’ll put his arms around her just like in her dreams. He’ll pull her close. She can already feel how hard and warm his body will be. He’ll lift her chin, gaze into her eyes. His lips will brush her cheek and send shivers through every part of her and her lips will part waiting for his and with the aurora dancing above them it will be even more than she’s imagined, even more than she’s dreamed of.
	Her whole body tenses. Any second now.
	Sven turns toward the cabin. “Have to get the transmitter set up. Thanks again, Lotte. Great to see you!”
	Lotte closes her eyes, blots out the dancing lights, her face flaming. How could she have been so stupid? How could she talk herself into something that will never happen? She climbs back into the sleigh, back into the real world. The tears she can’t stop dim the brilliance of the night sky. 
	She lets the horses find their way home. 
					Chapter 24
					  KARI
	April 9, 1941. A day of mourning. The awful anniversary. Trondheim shuts down at noon. Traffic halts, stores close, schools empty. For thirty minutes we stand silent, remembering the day the Germans invaded — exactly one year ago. I huddle with all the others outside the main school building. The weak spring sun is not having much effect. I raise my coat collar against the wind and cold.
	Thirty minutes to stand there and remember the before times. Food memories are their own punishment. Every time we drink coffee made of acorns or eat bread that’s half sawdust we’re tormented by memories of  roasting chicken, of rye bread fresh from the oven, apple cake and sizzling bacon — especially the bacon — of  having all you could eat, more than you could eat, even leftovers. 
	The things we do now to fill our bellies. Cormorant eggs. Before the Nazis, who could imagine raiding their nests? I used to love watching those loud mouthed athletes swoop over the water, plummet into the waves, come up with beaks full of herring for the young ones waiting in their nests high up on the cliffs. Now we raid those nests because cormorant eggs are food, no matter how disgusting they taste.  Now we scale the cliffs to the cormorant nests. because 400,000 German soldiers are eating what should be feeding us!
	I try to remember waking up when I knew every day would be like all the days before and I’d open my closet and there would be normal clothes hanging there that actually fit — not dresses from dyed sheets or coats Mama’s sewn from worn blankets, some held together with safety pins because even buttons are hard to find.
	 I can hardly remember what it was like to go out with friends and dance and holler and not worry about a curfew. Every day used to bring something to look forward to — maybe just smiles from people on the street. I pull up faces of  neighbors, one by one, remembering how we trusted them to be there for us no matter what, how we knew we could count on them. Until we couldn’t.
	I used to paint the beauty of this place — what the light does to Nidaros Cathedral at different times of day. How the snow changes the scraggliest trees into puffy wonders. How gaudy autumn colors reflect in mountain lakes. Not anymore. The Nazis have stolen beauty too, killed it off with their ugliness. What I paint now is a record of what they’ve done to Trondheim. It’s not pretty.
	 I have to do the remembering even if it’s hard.  My mind has to be a witness to the way the world was, the way it has to be again. I can’t ever forget this world is not the world that’s meant to be, or the dull days of fear and hunger and suspicion and hatred will destroy those memories, erase that world, like it never existed. 
	That would mean the Nazi’s have  won.
					
					Chapter 25
					  KARI
	  I’m late getting home. I stayed after school to work on my painting. Mama will be worried, of course. She’s paranoid because there are  rumors, which may or may not be true, of people disappearing off the street. I’m prepared to get yelled at when I open the front door, but what I hear instead is the sound of weeping in the kitchen. Mama, her dress ripped, is cleaning a bloody gash on Rachel Knudsen’s swollen face! 
	“Oh, Kari, you won’t believe what happened,” Mama says.
	“What? What is it?”
	“Come. Sit.”  
	I take a seat across the table from Rachel Knudsen. Her dress is bloody and torn and stained. She reaches a hand toward me and I take it. It’s ice cold. Mama wrings out a cloth from the bowl of water on the table and dabs at the wound.
	 “I was at the Synagogue with Rachel and her knitting group,” she says. “We were getting ready to leave when there was banging on the front door, they always keep it locked. And shouting — in German. The six of us were all alone. No one was going to open that door. They broke it down, Kari! The Gestapo stormed in, a dozen of them. They smashed the shrine for the Torah rolls, tore down the altar and the prayer stand and shot at the chandeliers. Some of them even started chopping up the benches. The other women ran, but not Rachel. You should have seen her.” She’s stopped cleaning the wound. “You were a demon, weren’t you dear, screaming at them, clawing at the Nazi in charge. One of them hit her in the face with his rifle butt. He must have hit her shoulder, too. She’s having trouble moving her left arm.”
	“Oh, Mrs. Knudsen.” 
	Mama’s not done. “They called her a dirty Jewish whore and even more disgusting things I won’t repeat.”
	“It’s a good thing your mother was there,” Mrs. Knudsen says. “If she hadn’t dragged me away I’d be in a Nazi prison now.” She flinches as Mama’s dabs iodine on the wound. “What happened to me isn’t important. It’s the Synagogue, the center of our lives. That’s what they’ve destroyed. That’s the tragedy.”	  
	Now I’ve seen it up close  — what the bastards do just for the fun of it. And how helpless we are. It eats at our insides.	
					Chapter 26
					  KARI
	Sugar, flour, salt, meat, milk — they disappeared first. It’s even hard to find potatoes or carrots now. Mama spends most of  her day in lines that just keep getting longer, getting to the front of the line only to be told there’s no more ___________, you fill in the blank. It’s changed her. I had no idea she knew how to curse like that.
	Mama and I are our hands and knees in our front garden digging up her precious flowers because you can’t eat flowers. She’s close by, muttering. I catch some of her new vocabulary as she plunges her shovel into the dirt. Ever since I can remember she’s tended this patch, fed it with buckets of horse manure from Lotte’s farm and her own fertilizer made of fish scraps, daring the weeds to grow among her roses and delphiniums and peonies and plants I don’t even know the names of.
	This little patch gave her so much pleasure, something all her own. The whole neighborhood enjoyed what she created. Her face glowed when people stopped to admire her roses. It will all be gone by the time we’re done today. By Midsummer her garden will be crowded with potatoe plants instead of blossoms, potatoes to keep us going through the winter. At least that’s the plan. 
	Mama’s isn’t the only garden going bare. Neighbors all up and down the street are doing the same thing. It would be nice if some of her precious plants could find new homes, but these days flowers are a luxury no one can afford, like beauty.  
	I glance over at Mama digging up her beloved Leda rose. It’s my favorite, too. Every spring its tiny buds would swell until one morning we’d wake up to hundreds of white blossoms tinged with pink and we’d open the downstairs windows so they could perfume the whole house. Leda is already flush with spring growth, its new leaves opening red before they turn a glowing green, but Mama’s easing it out of the soil, careful not to damage any of its roots even though she’ll throw it on the pile by the gate to be hauled away as trash. Tears run down her cheeks.
	Damn them!


BBC WORLD NEWS -- JUNE 22, 1941 — GERMAN FORCES HAVE INVADED THE SOVIET UNION. IN A PRE--DAWN OFFENSIVE, GERMAN TROOPS PUSHED INTO THE USSR FROM THE SOUTH AND WEST, WITH A THIRD FORCE MAKING THEIR WAY FROM THE NORTH TOWARDS LENINGRAD. AT 05:00 GMT, AN HOUR AFTER THE INVASION BEGAN, THE NAZI MINISTER FOR PROPAGANDA, JOSEPH GOEBBELS, WENT ON NATIONAL RADIO TO READ A PROCLAMATION BY ADOLF HITLER PROMISING THAT THE MOBILIZATION OF THE GERMAN ARMY WOULD BE THE “GREATEST THE WORLD HAS EVER SEEN”.

					Chapter 27
					   KARI		
	I love the woods this time of year — everything growing like crazy during the last days of summer, racing to beat frosts that are only a month away. It used to be nobody paid much attention to the August blueberries growing wild in the forest. If you really wanted blueberries, you’d  just go to the green-grocers and buy a box —  a whole lot easier than picking them on your hands and knees. But these days food comes from wherever you can scrounge it, plus blueberries are free, plus they taste a lot better than almost everything else we’re filling our stomachs with.
	I head for my favorite clearing, about half an hour into the trees. Its edges are always crowded with low blueberry bushes so there should be plenty to fill my bucket if no-one else has found it. I walk through dappled light, the morning breeze cool on my cheek. I stop at my favorite nurse log and run my fingers over its trunk covered in velvety moss, its decay already giving life to baby saplings. The rat--a--tat- of a woodpecker out for an insect breakfast stops me. There’s its red head high up on a snag. 
	I’m here for more than blueberries. I need alone time — time to get away from the uniformed thugs that fill Trondheim, time to relax muscles that are always tight and tense, time to clear a head full of thoughts I can’t control, that just spin round and round.
	The clearing’s like I remember from last year, the bushes black with berries. I drop to my knees and run my blueberry rake through  branches bending under their load. The first scoop goes directly into my mouth, the juice running down my chin. The bushes are dripping with berries and they’re all mine and it makes me feel as wealthy as .  .  .Ilse. I smile. I was right to come.
	A noise. 
	I look up, scan the clearing — and freeze. 
	A German uniform! There, just under the pines on the other side of the clearing. I spring to my feet, my whole body screaming RUN! But my feet don’t move.
	We lock eyes. The young soldier from Midsummer, from Christmas Eve! We stand there, staring at each other. He raises his hand. He turns and disappears into the trees. I breathe again. 
	My sacred blueberry woods polluted by a Nazi! I scream curses into the silent forest.


 
BBC WORLD NEWS — SEPTEMBER 7, 1941 — WINSTON CHURCHILL SPEAKS TO THE NATION AND TO THE WORLD AS GERMAN BOMBS DROP ON LONDON —  “THIS CRUEL, WANTEN, INDISCRIMINATE BOMBING OF LONDON IS, OF COURSE PART OF HITLER’S INVASION PLAN. LITTLE DOES HE KNOW THE SPIRIT OF THE BRITISH NATION OR THE TOUGH FIBER OF THE LONDONERS WHOSE FOREBEARS PLAYED A LEADING PART IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF OUR INSTITUTIONS AND HAVE BEEN BRED TO VALUE FREEDOM FAR ABOVE THEIR LIVES.” 

					Chapter 28
					  LOTTE
	Lotte pedals up to the bike rack on the first day of school. Jurgen is waiting for her. He waves. 
	“Jurgen, what’s up?” She climbs the steps amid the rush of students as late as she is.
	“The Gestapo. They know, Lotte.”
	“What are you talking about? Come on, we’re going to be late.”
	“No, listen. Last night they made their weekly call and my traitor of a father told them about the pigs you’re hiding in the woods, that you’re selling meat on the black market. They’re sure to search, Lotte, maybe they’re already on their way.”
	“No!”
	Lotte charges down the steps to her bike. It isn’t only the pigs they might find. There’s the radio. They’re sure to look in the attic. And Saga, her beautiful girl. She’s been so careful to keep her out of sight — but if they search the barn .  .  .
	The rain starts as Lotte speeds into the farmyard, scattering chickens. She runs to  her father, loading cans of milk into the wagon..
	“Papa, Jurgen’s father told the Gestapo about the pigs. They could be on their way now. What are we going to do?”
	“Oh, Lord! I can’t make pigs disappear. They’re bound to find them. That bastard!” 
	“But Papa, they’ll search the house. What if they find the radio?”
	“We have to move it. Come on!”
	But where? Where?
	They climb the ladder to the attic. Her mother calls up the stairs “Lotte, is that you? What are you doing home? Are you alright?”  
	“We have to hide the radio, Mama. The Germans know about the pigs. They could be here any minute.”
	Her father’s moving boxes out of the way. “We’ll put it in Aunt Helga’s room under her bed. Just pray they won’t want to disturb a sick old lady.”
	Squawking chickens. A truck engine. 
	“Hurry, papa!”
	Voices. Banging on the front door.
	“We have to hide the radio from the Germans, Aunty,” her mother is saying. “It’s going under your bed.”
	‘What? What are you talking about?” Aunt Helga mutters.
	More banging.
	“No time to explain,” her mother says.“Don’t say a word, Aunty. Just pretend you’re asleep.”
	“Coming. I’m coming!” her father calls, heading for the front door. 
	Two of them. Gestapo uniforms. Skulls and lightening bolts on their collars.. 
	“Herr Olsen?” 
	“Yes.”
	“We’re here to search your farm. We hear you have pigs you haven’t declared — that you’re selling meat on the black market,” one of the grey uniforms says.
	“Who told you that?”
	“Never mind. Take me to the pigs.” He turns to the second Nazi. “You search the house”	
	Lotte’s stomach heaves. Sweat runs down her back.	
	“Start at the top — and don’t miss anything.” he says as he follows her father out the front door.
	The second German climbs the ladder to the attic. The sound of boxes being emptied, furniture tipped over, breaking glass. Cursing.
	“Just junk,” he says as he comes down the ladder. “What’s in there?” he points to Aunt Helga’s closed door. Lotte holds her breath.  
	“It’s just my Aunt,” her mother says. “She’s very sick, pneumonia we think.”
	He pushes the door open.  
	“Who are you?” Aunt Helga croaks. She tries to sit up, starts to cough. “Oh, Lotte, get the bed pan. I need it. Now!”
	Lotte sinks to her knees, the bedpan is wedged in front of the radio.
	“Quick girl,” Aunt Helga says as she starts lifting her nightgown revealing purple veined legs.
	The German backs out of the room, follows her mother into one of the other bedrooms..
	Lotte lets out the breath she’s been holding and.races to the barn. If only she can tack Saga up, get her out of here before they come to search the barn. The horse stomps and tosses her head.
	“You’re afraid, too.” Lotte says as she puts Saga in the cross ties and strokes her neck. “It’s alright. It’s alright,” she whispers, tightening the girth. She slips on the bridle.
	A noise behind her.
	“So, what do we have here? Going for a ride?”
	Lotte freezes, squeezes her eyes shut, keeps her back to the German.
	“Nice animal. All saddled and bridled, too. Our captain will be happy.”
	He slaps Saga on the rump. She kicks out. Her hoof grazes his leg and he lets out a curse. 
	“Load the bitch in the truck. Now!”
	Lotte presses her cheek against Saga’s sleek shoulder, feels her warmth, feels the pulse of her strong heart, feels her fear.
	“No,” she says.
	“Do it! Now! If you’re lucky we’ll take the horse and not your father.”
	It is done. Saga is gone. And Lotte helped make it happen, loaded her into the truck because Saga would never have let the Germans do it, would have fought until they decided she was just too much trouble, until they shot her. The rumble of the truck fades, but above it she hears a whinny, a desperate whinny.
	It’s started to rain again, but Lotte hardly notices until it becomes a down pour, soaking her through. She makes her way back to the barn, to Saga’s stall.  Lotte inhales the scent of the mare that lingers in the air. She squeezes her eyes shut with a crazy hope that when she opens them Saga will be standing there, staring down at her, a questioning look in those dark brown eyes tinged with gold. But, no. Of course not. The stall is empty. So is her heart. She knows what will happen when the German captain tries to mount her.
	Memories flood in. The Trondheim Ridskole. They needed stable help and Lotte took the job, even though it was on the other side of Trondheim, just to spend time around the show jumpers they bred and trained. No way she could afford lessons, but she could watch the trainers — and she did, every chance she got.
	Lotte was there the day the new mare arrived, her coat a flaming chestnut that lit up the arena. She’d watched as they set her free, watched her gallop around the perimeter, throwing in bucks, rearing when the trainer and his helper tried to get close, her strides long, reaching, elevated, her mane and tail flowing fire. Stunning! An audience gathered, drawn by the mare’s frantic whinnying, drawn to see how Einar Berg, famous trainer, would handle this wild animal. 
	They’d tried to tire her out. Around and around the arena she galloped. Her coat grew foamy with sweat, but she showed no sign of slowing down. Finally, Berg threw a rope around her neck.  Before she could pivot, his assistant had a rope around a hind leg. The mare struggled and went down, landing with a thud. They had a bridle on her before she got to her feet. The mare stood there, trembling, as they saddled her and tightened the girth. 
	Her nostrils flared. Her eyes were white with fear. Lotte had wanted to leave, but she stood there,  mesmerized by this wild creature. 
	The assistant gave Berg a leg up and backed away. The mare stood perfectly still. Maybe she’d given in. Sometimes they did that, the docile ones. Maybe she was one of them. 
	But then she exploded, flying across the arena and back again, digging her hooves into the sand just before the arena fence. Blood dribbled from her mouth, from Berg’s frantic attempts to keep her head up. He lost a rein. In an instant the mare dove with her muscular neck, her head between her knees, jerking the other rein from his grip, kicking out with her hind legs, humping her back in a powerful buck. He grabbed for the saddle as the enraged horse bucked across the arena, only stopping when Einar Berg landed on the hard packed sand with a shriek of pain. The mare took off across the arena, but this time she didn’t stop at the five foot fence. She sat back on her haunches, released the spring of their power, and cleared it in a giant leap.
	Lotte gasped. So did the other spectators. 
	They tried a few more times, but no-one could stay aboard the wild mare. She was headed for the knacker’s yard. Lotte begged to have her in exchange for a year’s work. Einar Berg agreed. 
	They’d worked so hard, she and Saga, come so far together. The mare was still hostile to anyone but Lotte, and with a strange German on her back .  .  . Lotte knew exactly what would happen — knew exactly what Saga’s fate would be.
   
					Chapter 29
					  KARI
	I’m looking for Lotte at lunch when Jurgen tells me about the Germans.
	“If she’s not back yet, they came. Who knows what they’ve done? I have to find out!”
	I pedal as hard as I can. There are truck tire gouges in their muddy driveway. The Germans have been here.
	I open the door to the barn. Lotte’s sitting on the floor inside Saga’s stall. She jumps up when she sees me, her face swollen from crying.
	“Oh, Kari,” she says. “They took Saga!”
	Then I’m hugging her, feeling her sobs. I squeeze my eyes shut against the image of the Nazis hauling her beautiful mare away, stealing the core of Lotte’s life, stealing the hundreds of hours of training that turned Saga into an upper level jumper, stealing Lotte’s hope for the future, for “when the war is over.”
	“They said I was lucky — I should be grateful they took  Saga instead of Papa .” 
	Bastards! Bastards! Bastards!
	“I’m so scared of what will happen to her, Kari. I’m the only one she’s ever let on her back. She’ll dump any other rider, you know she will. She already kicked one of the Nazis. What will they do to her, Kari?”
	The only answers I have are too horrible to share with my best friend. Besides I know she’s thinking the same thing — they torture and murder innocent people, why would they do any less to a rebellious animal? We sit, leaning back against the empty stall’s wall. Lotte lays her head on my shoulder.
	“I have to get her back before they hurt her.”
	I don’t say anything, don’t tell her it’s impossible — because she knows that as well as I do. 
					Chapter 30
					  KARI
	It’s already been a month. No news of Saga, though all of us have asked anyone who might have a clue where they’ve taken the mare. Lotte doesn’t talk about it anymore. When I ask she just says others have lost so much more. But she’s changed. It’s like the Nazis stole a part of who she is. When I catch her looking off into the distance, like she’s far away, I know she’s remembering Saga. She doesn’t laugh nearly as much as she used to. I miss that.  
 	It’s Saturday, the day Lotte and I hitch Fru Hest and Freya to their wagon and deliver eggs to Bakke’s Grocery — with me driving. I’m just learning.
	We push the wagon out of the barn. Freya and Fru Hest stamp their hooves. They’re impatient to be off. We fasten all the harness buckles and I climb up to the driver’s bench next to Lotte. She hands me the reins. I have beginner’s butterflies. 
	“Trot!” I say. We’re off to the music of the harness bells keeping time with eight trotting hooves. I love that sound. 
	“We  have a few stops to make before Bakke’s Grocery,” Lotte says. “The first one is the Ness farm just ahead.”
	“New egg customers? I thought they raised their own chickens.”
	“They’re a different kind of customer,” Lotte says. She opens her coat and pulls a batch of papers from an inside pocket. “Last night’s BBC news — the Lotte edition. I took it down in shorthand and typed it up this morning. It’s not perfect, but it’s a lot better than the German lies in the Aften Posten.”
	Not Lotte, too. “You know what the Germans will do to you if they find out. What if someone gives you away? How do you know who to trust? Don’t do this, Lotte!”
	“Listen, Kari. This is for Saga. I’ll do anything I can to hurt them. We act like helpless slaves and they’ve won.” She gives me an elbow. “Besides, it’s doing wonders for my shorthand. Think of the job offers when the war’s over.”
	I know she’s trying to joke, act normal like it’s no big deal, but it doesn’t come off. Her voice is  flat —  no enthusiasm, not the old Lotte. She's caught up in this no-end-in-sight nightmare and  I know exactly how she feels after what the Nazis did to her, how much she wants to get back at them. I do too, so bad. 
	But .  .  .that’s not going to happen.    	
	
BBC NEWS: DECEMBER 7, 1941 — THE UNITED STATES NAVEL BASE AT PEARL HARBOR HAS BEEN ATTACKED BY THE JAPANESE AIR FORCE. THE  BATTLESHIPS USS ARIZONA AND USS OKLAHOMA WERE SUNK. MUCH OF THE REST OF THE FLEET WAS HEAVILY DAMAGED. THE UNITED STATES IS AT WAR WITH JAPAN.

BBC NEWS: DECEMBER 11, 1941 — CHANCELLOR ADOLF HITLER DECLARES WAR ON THE UNITED STATES.
					Chapter 31
					   KARI
	Ilse doesn’t need a scholarship but I’m not going anywhere without one. There’s only one a year to the Fine Arts Academy for a Trondheim student. That’s it. A committee decides who gets it when they judge Mr. Hagen’s end-of-year assignment — a  portrait of our town, our Trondheim.
 	Everyone says Ilse has talent; they’re probably right if you like that sort of thing,  Monet-like paintings, easy to look at, all hazy and dreamy. And boring. I paint the world the way I see it, the real world of docks and mills and real people with real wrinkles and these days you’d never call my paintings pretty. What I painted for Mr. Hagen is the image that haunts me, that won’t let me go — it’s that tank parked in the main square. It takes up most of the painting with City Hall in the background draped in blood red Nazi banners.
	I sat in the park on the other side of the square from the German soldiers who stand at the fancy entrance and give the Nazi salute. Even that far away the fear was there, but I went back four times, shivering in the November cold, fingers and toes growing numb. I had to draw every detail of its body, its tracks, its turret, its guns, like maybe if I captured the killing machine on paper it would be less terrifying.
	But it wasn’t.
	And yesterday, as I sat there for the final time, a car pulled up, long and black and shiny, and the thug-in-charge, Obersturmbannfuhrer Ernst Flesch, commander of the security police, got out. Full SS uniform, death’s head on his visor cap, double lightening bolts on his lapel, the devil himself, a huge black dog at his side.
	I drew him as a zombie. 
	Gestapo, Nazi, Waffen-SS. Only words. But now, just thinking those words and there’s  the image of that monster Nazi dog stalking, jaws open, panting, blood red tongue hanging out, coming after me, coming after everyone I love. I can’t get rid of it. 
	This is not our town — not anymore. It belongs to the strutting barbarians, to the snarling Nazi dog. It belongs to their killing machines.
	Yesterday I had to leave when my stomach spasmed and I threw up all over my old rubber boots. 					

					 Chapter 32
					ANDREAS
	The boredom. Almost as painful as the cold from the frozen ground penetrating the soles of  his boots, the cold seeping through the dress uniform not made for Norwegian winters, not made for standing guard outside Nazi headquarters for four hours. His shift is over soon — for that Andreas is grateful. He’ll return to barracks, strip off the dress uniform,  put on as many layers as possible under his regular uniform, and try to warm himself in the little heat given off by the smoky wood-burning stove in the corner. 
	Half an hour of his shift left. Picture something warm. A roaring fire in the fireplace at home. Him stretching his legs toward those flames after a day on the slopes. How good that would feel, how he’d breathe in perfume rising from the spiced wine heating over the fire, breathe in the other smells, delicious smells, coming from the kitchen. Supper in preparation. Meat slowly stewing, bread fresh from the oven. All he could eat and no army rations. His mouth waters.
	The other guard’s clicking heels pull him from his day dream. A car is pulling up, and not just any car.  The fluttering German flags, mounted one on each side of the hood, grow still as it comes to a stop. Andreas springs forward to open the door for Obersturmbannfuhrer Ernst Flesch and his hound, who leaps from the back seat almost knocking Andreas over. The mastiff is always at Flesch’s side, more fearsome than any human body guard. 
	His guard shift over, Andreas makes his way around the square. That girl with the missing braid. She’s sitting on a stone bench drawing. Will she look up, see him, react, say something? He comes closer. She’s lost in her work. 
	 The brutality of it!
	The black dog, nearly the size of the man holding it, jaws open, tongue hanging, slavering. And the man? Definitely Ernst Flesch standing beside his perfectly drawn car, but in place of a normal face, a death’s head, like the miniature death’s head on his visor cap.
	She’s drawn it all — the guards standing outside their booths on either side of the entrance, just where he’d stood until a few minutes ago. Their faces are death heads, too — empty eye sockets, jaws hanging open, pointy sharpened teeth. Ugly, so ugly. 
	This is how she sees them/him. So much hatred. Nothing will ever change that. Shame washes over Andreas. The shame of the oppressor.
 	As he stands there her body jerks and she vomits into the snow. 
					Chapter 33
					  KARI
	Our projects are due tomorrow. I stay late in the art room to put the final touches on the tank.  Everyone else has left, covering their easels with drapes. Ilse’s canvas is on the other side of the room. I’ve told myself I don’t want to see it, but now that everyone’s gone I know I’ll look. I pull off the drape and let it fall to the floor.
	It’s a pastel of her house and garden, all in misty light. Exactly what the committee will vote for, this wishful-thinking-chocolate-box illusion of the Trondheim that used to be, that doesn’t exist anymore.
	 She’s won — again.
	I swing at the easel. The canvas goes flying and crashes to the floor. I grab the scissors off Mr. Hagen’s desk. I’ll cut it up, leave it in ugly shreds!
	But I don’t, of course. I don’t even have the courage to do that
	I just right the easel and put the canvas back, all those lying pinks and yellows and pale blues glowing. Totally undamaged.
	Too bad. 
 				*			*			*
 	Next morning I stop by the art room before my first class. Our efforts are on display, the drapes off. Mr. Hagen calls me over to his desk.
	“Is that how you see Trondheim, Kari?”
	I nod. “This isn’t our town. We live here but it’s not ours, not any more.”
	“I see. Could you come by at the end of the day?”
	What’s that about?
				*			*			*
	He’s alone when I walk into the art room after my last class.
	“Shut the door, would you Kari? Have a seat. The details of your work are always excellent. You have a real gift. I’m wondering if you might be willing to draw other aspects of the Trondheim that’s no longer ours.” 
	“Like what?” I’m totally confused.
	“Like the bases the Germans are building, the expanded airfield, the port. Drawings like that could be very useful. Do you understand what I’m saying?”
	I go rigid. He must see the terror on my face. 
	“Alright. I understand, Kari” he says. 
					
					Chapter 34
					   KARI
	 Mr. Hagen’s art class. Our field trip to study a 3,000 year old petroglyph of a moose. I stare at the lifelike outline of the animal. It moves, starts to detach itself from the rock, turns to face us, fury in its huge eyes and we’re running, the sound of giant hooves pounding the rocky ground getting closer and closer.  I glance back. It’s not the moose chasing us, it’s Ernst Flesch and the guards and the killer dog! 
	I wake up, heart pounding. The only sound is my alarm going off. Mostly I don’t remember dreams, but this one is so vivid — my feet not moving fast enough, the Nazis closing in. But the moose?
	Then I remember. Today we’re going after the real thing, a whole winter’s meat supply and I’m part of the hunt for the first time. Papa says I’m old enough, now, not to get in the way, but I’m pretty sure it’s because he and Sven need help to pack out hundreds of pounds of moose meat.
	I hear Papa rattling around in the kitchen and throw off the covers. My feet hit the icy floor. I start pulling on all the layers I laid out last night — fast. I glance out the window. December. Pitch black at five a.m., of course, but the snow throws its own light. It won’t get much lighter than this for hours and then just a hint of grey on the horizon where the sun should be. Sven spent the night because we’re heading out before Trondheim wakes up. Sven says moose are most active at dawn plus there shouldn’t be any German patrols around this early. We’ll use the rifle he’s kept hidden at our summer cabin. The Nazis confiscated Papa’s guns months ago. 
	We grunt at each other when I enter the kitchen. Way too early for conversation. Papa’s got a bowl of no-name porridge and a cup of fake coffee ready for me. My stomach says no, but I have to get it down because who knows when we’ll eat next. 
	“Snowed again last night,” Papa says. “The sleds should work just fine.”
	We heft our rucksacks heavy with all the stuff we’ll need to butcher a moose, and head out into the dark. Cold. So very cold. But no wind. We harness ourselves to the sleds and set off, the faint shushing of our snowshoes in white powder the only sound. 
	I’ve seen the forest giants from a distance, of course, but today I’ll get close. They look like living cartoons, like creatures that didn’t get put together quite right — six feet tall at the shoulder, massive heads and massive antlers on top of long skinny legs. Sven says they’re made just right for what they have to do — cross fast flowing rivers and travel through deep snow. 
	It takes an hour to reach the pond where Sven’s spotted evidence of a couple of bull moose. Their six inch hoof prints are nearly covered with snow, but we spot trampled vegetation, broken branches — and fresh droppings. They haven’t left. We hunker down behind a couple of boulders which could be a lot bigger as far as I’m concerned. There’s a slight breeze, but we’re downwind from the pond so they shouldn’t catch our scent. We whisper because they have lousy eyesight but amazing senses of smell and hearing. 
	Sven peels white bark off a birch tree and forms it into a cone like a bullhorn. He starts making the grunting noises of a bull moose in rutt. Papa raises his binoculars, searching the other side of the pond for movement. It’s started snowing again. We wait. And wait. The cold is seeping through my layers. Maybe the moose headed to some other random pond. Sven makes more grunting noises. 
	An answer!
	“There,” Papa whispers, pointing toward the edge of the forest. Out steps a huge shape— dark against the snow, swinging its massive head from side to side, trying to scent its rival.
	“Too far away,” Sven says. “I have to get him closer.” He raises his homemade moose caller and makes the rutting noise again. The moose head stops swinging, its ears are pricked in our direction, but he doesn’t move. Sven tries again, louder this time and the moose answers. He’s trotting our way! 
	“Remember, get him from the side, right above a foreleg, into his lungs,” Papa says.
	“I know, I know.” Sven steadies his rifle on the boulder. “Come on you beauty,” he murmurs, “just a few more steps.”
	I jump at the crack of his shot.
	“Got him,” Sven says. The moose lunges sideways. I’m waiting for him to drop — but he keeps coming. He’s still trotting toward us, getting huger with every step, like in my dream!
	I tug on Papa’s sleeve. “We have to get out of here. He’ll run right over us!”
	Papa says “Stay where you are.”
	I can’t breathe.
	Ten feet from our pathetic hiding place the moose goes down on its knees. It lets out a deep groan and collapses on its side with a thud, its legs still moving. 
	Then it’s motionless.
	So sudden. This creature, so full of life until a moment ago, now just a heap of fur and antlers. And I’m feeling  . . .what? Relieved we didn’t get trampled, which is good, glad we’ll eat this winter, also good, but stunned. Life is so fragile. How can something so powerful be snuffed out in an instant. I don’t want to think about that.
	Papa and Sven unfold the tarp. They struggle to heave the huge carcass onto it. Papa cuts along its belly from butt to chest and Sven pulls out its guts. He hands me the heart and liver and lungs. They’re steaming. I drop them into the cloth bags Mama made. We use skinning knives and our hands to peel back the pelt. I’m okay now — what’s left just looks like meat, not majestic moose. We heft the quartered sections and the pelt onto the sleds and tie them down. Head and antlers and legs go into the pond and sink out of sight. Sven folds up the tarp and I heap fresh snow on top of the blood-soaked earth. We leave no trace.
	We’re pulling sleds loaded with hundreds of pounds of moose. The first incline and I’m wondering why I ever wanted to be part of this. Papa and Sven have to get behind and push my sled to make it to the top. Then there’s a long downhill stretch and I recover a little before the next hill. We’re headed to the summer cabin Sven uses for his radio transmissions. It has a shed out back where we’ll stash most of the meat. It’s already partly frozen.
	It takes forever, each step’s a struggle. We reach the cabin. Most of the meat goes into the shed but we bring one of the quarters and all the organs into the cabin. Sven starts a fire in the stove and I huddle next to it, fingers and toes starting to thaw. Papa and Sven butcher the moose quarter. Steaks and roasts and stew meat.
	One final challenge — avoiding Germans while getting all that moose meat home. Sven cuts a bunch of pine boughs and a couple of young fir saplings to cover the meat. Just innocent Christmas decorations.
	Does he really think this will work? I don’t have a better plan.
	Sven stays at the cabin and Papa and I and head in different directions — me into Trondheim and Papa to Lotte’s farm. They’ve shared so much with us. I’m glad we can give back something in return.

	I hear them before I see them. That guttural caught-in-the-throat sound of German. My heart stops. A patrol! They always travel in threes. My legs don’t want to move but I force them to take one step and then another. One of the Germans points at the sled and says something I don’t hear.
	“Halt!”
	I hear that.
	“What do we have here?” One of them nudges the sled with his rifle.
	“Christmas,” I say, my voice thin and squeaky.
	“We could use a nice tree,” one of them says, grinning. 
	“Just the right size too.” 
	If they cut the rope, if they lift the tree, if they see what’s underneath .  .  .! I’ve stopped breathing. 
	“Who’se going to drag a tree back to the barracks?” the third asks.
	No one’s volunteering.
	The first one says “Guess we’ll have to do without.”
	They move on, chattering, laughing. I stand in the falling snow trying to stop the shaking.
					

					Chapter 35
					   ILSE
	She stands at the top of the stairs listening to Mama gush over the moose meat Kari’s unloading from her sled. 
	“Oh, aren’t you a dear! We’ll have a real Hanukkah feast. I was so sure we’d have to make do with whatever garbage the Germans haven’t confiscated yet.”
	Kari is saying something Ilse can’t hear.
	Her mother says “You were on the hunt? Oh Kari, I’d never want to get that close to a moose! And getting it all back to Trondheim. You’re quite an athlete.”
	Blah, blah, blah. Ilse wants to charge down the stairs, slam the door on that grinning face before Mama hugs Kari the way she always always does when she says good-bye to her. 
	But she won’t. 
	She should be used to it by now. Saint Kari. Kari, queen of the slopes. Kari’s paintings so original — when anyone can see they’re just plain ugly. Worst of all Kari who has somehow hypnotized Erik. 
	Kari — stupid teddy bear thief!
	Ilse stands on the landing, hands over ears, and tries to block out her mother’s cheery farewell. It isn’t working. Mama and Papa never speak to her with that note of admiration. Their daughter will never do more than hobble through life, short of breath, always terrified of provoking another asthma attack.
	Ilse slams the door to her room and begins concocting the lies she’ll tell her friends tomorrow about Kari, making sure she’s close enough to hear the laughter.
	But it still hurts.  
				        1942
					Chapter 36
					  KARI
	Jurgen and I are on the bus headed for  the ski jumps at Grenasen. The perfect day for it,  sun sitting on the horizon, as high up as it gets this time of year, and not a bit of wind. The Grenasen jump is almost brand new, opened right before the Nazi invasion. Jurgen and I were there for that amazing day. We still talk about seeing Birger Ruud, two time Olympic champion, barrel down the inrun, take off and fly over all of us. We promised each other that one day it would be us at the top of that jump waiting for the whistle, waiting to push off, tuck, feel the acceleration, the pull of the slope, leaning out over our skies as we soar above an admiring crowd. 			
	One day. But in the meantime, it’s the practice jumps for us, built out of snow every year. We go off the steepest of them, plenty steep enough for me.
	On the bus I recognize a few of the daredevils who take on the monster. I get goose bumps just watching them. There are some Germans, too, so we take the far back seats — as far  from them as possible.
	The bus jerks to a stop. We clamber down and start the trek up the hill, skis over our shoulders. The snow that fell last night sparkles and there’s that crackly sound our boots make with every step on those dry powdery crystals. Music to my ears.
	It’s a steep climb — no extra breath for conversation. We’re both huffing when we reach the top. 
	“You first,” I say. 
	“Okay. Watch the master and learn,” Jurgen says, a big grin on his face.
	He pushes off. He’s good, a natural, better than I am, though I’ll never admit that to him. I know what jumping means for Jurgen, how the danger and the thrill of  soaring through the air helps cancel the stress of his week, the latest brutality of his father.
	It’s a good jump. He lands Telemark style, one ski in front of the other. So graceful. Then it’s my turn. I roll my shoulders, shake my whole body, try to get rid of the tension. 
	I push off and gravity takes over. Butt back. Shoulders over knees, arms tight at my sides, wind speed making me tear up. The end of the inrun. A bounce up and then lean. I lean over my ski tips, hang there, float above the world and there’s that feeling like no other, and for a few seconds I’m an eagle surveying my world. The ground comes up fast. I touch down. A fair landing — not as fancy as Jurgen’s, but that’s all right. 
	He’s waiting for me.
	“Not bad for a beginner,” he says and slaps me on the back. I punch his shoulder. We take a break to watch the crazies coming down the real jump. Someone’s just started their descent, totally tucked, going really fast. He comes off the inrun and rises into the air, hangs there so long, his body streamlined, nose almost touching his ski tips and I’m thinking of Birger Ruud. Who is it? He lands and I hear cheers — from Germans! He comes to a stop, turns our way, and I’m close enough to see his face. 
	Him! The German, the young one from Midsummer, from Christmas, from the blueberry woods. He looks our way, stares right at us for a long moment before he turns back to his cheering  buddies.
					Chapter 37
					  KARI
	Sunday, the first of February. Papa’s on his way to the Shetland Islands again and.Mama has one of her headaches, so it’s just Lotte and me headed into Trondheim to hear the Cathedral Dean denounce the traitor Vidkun Quisling. The Germans finally did it — put him in charge of the collaborationist government. He's their handy Norwegian figurehead, happy to do their dirty work for them, but everyone knows Reichskommissar Josef Terboven is really still in charge.
	The last big demonstration was on the first anniversary of the invasion. All of Norway came to a standstill. Traffic halted for thirty minutes at noon. Nobody was in a store or used a car or tram or telephone. The whole country stood up to them. It made me proud. I want that feeling again.  
	 The tram’s only half full. Easy to avoid sitting next to the dozen or so German soldiers. They’re loud, but not paying any attention to us. Still, it’s a relief to get off at Nordre Gate.
	 Trondheim Cathedral. Snow-capped prophets and martyrs and disciples watch from their niches on the cathedral facade. It feels right we should be here at this shrine to St. Olaf, uniter of Norway a thousand years ago, right that this should be the place that unites us against a foreign invader again.
	People pour into the square from side streets, most wearing red hats and caps — red for the Norwegian flag. The Nazis hate them.There’s a line of German soldiers in front of the closed cathedral doors — all with guns! 
	We spot Sven and weave our way toward him.
	“What’s going on?” I ask.
	“A few people made it in before they closed the doors,” he says. “The rumor is they’ve refused to let Dean Fjellbu in — instead one of the Nazi pastors is using the service to celebrate Quisling’s inauguration.” 
	 The crowd is quiet but you can feel the electricity. I shudder. If someone throws something, if the crowd surges toward them, if someone yells a curse — what will they do with those rifles? I’m sweating in the bitter cold, but it’s impossible to leave. We’re packed in, shoulder to shoulder.  
	Then it happens.
	“A mighty fortress is our God, a trusty shield and weapon.” A woman’s voice, bell like, true, rings out over the crowd. Chattering stops. By the second line of the hymn there’s a wall of sound as thousands of voices take up the words we’ve sung since childhood.
	“For still our ancient foe doth seek to work us woe.” Martin Luther’s defiance sounds new again and we fling the power of his words at the German invaders who know this hymn as well as we do.
	I sing loud. The fear eases. As the words of last verse fade away I look around. I’m not the only one with tears running down my cheeks.
	“Jag, ve elsker dette landet.”  A booming bass voice close by takes up Norway’s national anthem! “Yes, we love this land!” Red hats come off. Arm links through arm and we are one voice, united. I see it in the faces all around me and I shiver — in a good way.
	The next day Norway’s six bishops resign.
	Do the Germans realize what they’ve done?     			                          								Chapter 38
						  KARI
	It will be dark soon. We’ve already been out with the horses for two hours, but Lotte’s turned off the trail that leads back to their farm.. 
	“Follow me. I have to check on something,” she calls back. I turn Bruni to follow Lotte and Fru Hest into the forest.	“Where are we going?” I ask.
	“You’ll see. It’s just up ahead.”
	Why all the mystery?
	We stop on top of the cliff. Through the trees I catch a glimpse of the Trondheim fjord far below. 
	“Yea! It’s there!” Lotte says.
	I pull up next to her and look down. A mammoth ship sits between the fjord’s two walls, surrounded by smaller vessels.
	“The Terpitz!” Lotte says. “Hitler’s prize battleship. London has to know it’s here. Come on, we have to tell Sven.” 
	We head for the summer cabin. There’s no path, but at least under the tree canopy it’s mostly a bed of pine needles, clear of brambles with only a little snow so we can trot the horses. 
	Thank goodness he’s there. 
	“Sven, the Terpitz is in the fjord. We just saw it,” Lotte says.
	He grabs a wooden case.  
	“Bad timing. I almost ran into a German patrol on my way here. Can’t be helped. London has to know.”
	He leads the way to a clearing at the edge of a ravine. We give him a hand setting up the totally forbidden transmitter on a flat topped boulder. He taps out his message. We’re about to head back to the cabin when the sound of voices stops us — German voices. I go rigid.  
	“Damn!” Sven says. “We can’t let them get the transmitter!” He drags it to the lip of the ravine and tips it over.
	“Kari, come on,” Lotte says. She disappears over the edge.
	The voices are much closer.
	“Kari, quick!”
	I ease myself over the edge of the ravine, feeling for footholds. I grasp a scraggly bush growing out of its side but it gives way and my foot slips and I slide, tumble, scrape against jagged rock, struggling not to cry out.
	“Quick, up against the side of the ravine,” Sven whispers. 
	I get to my feet, flatten myself against the rocky surface. They’re right above us now, the Germans, chatting, laughing, and my heart’s pounding so loud I’m sure they can hear it. 
	Please, oh please don’t let them look over the edge!
	Finally the voices grow fainter. I breathe again. The wood’s silence envelops us. Lotte and Sven start the climb out of the ravine. My legs are shaking so bad they have to drag me up over the edge.    
					Chapter 39
					   KARI
	I shuffle into Mr. Lund’s Monday history class with everyone else and make my way to my desk, its top so scored by generations of initials I had to squeeze mine into the top left corner. I pull my sweater closer. The weak late winter sun that struggles through the tall windows isn’t nearly enough to warm us. No fuel for the furnaces for weeks.
	There’s a tense buzz in the room, not the usual banter, not the usual kidding around. Mr. Lund’s calling us to order when the door opens. Our guest is here. Not really a guest — no-one invited him, but no-one could turn him down.
	It’s Carl Blomquist, traitor, head of Trondheim’s Nazi youth organization. 
	Chatter stops. He strides into the room. I look around. Tension on every face. I realize my fists are clenched, my whole body is clenched, and it’s not from the cold. 
	He's dressed in black, Nazi insignia on his collar, a wispy not-very-successful Hitler mustache on his lip. He cuts Mr. Lund’s introduction short with a wave of his hand and a heil Hitler salute and starts to speak. I look over at Jurgen. His finger is under his nose like a mustache, and he starts to wiggle it in time with Blomquist’s words.
	The bubble of a giggle forces its way up from deep inside. I try to swallow it, I’m desperate to swallow it, but it explodes — half sneeze, half belch. Lotte’s sitting next to me, a hand over her mouth, but her squeak escapes. Jurgen wiggles his fake mustache even faster. Snorts from Hans and Anna and Knute. Mr. Lund’s at the front of the class, jaws working, until a strangled noise escapes and the whole class explodes in uncontrollable laughter.  					Carl Blomquist stops, face crimson, bushy eyebrows working over eyes full of rage. Our laughter follows him as he stomps out of the room. 
	What have we done?
	

	Tuesday. Mr. Lund enters grim-faced. None of his usual corny history jokes to start the class. Not today. 
	“You all know what happened yesterday,” he says. “This is just the beginning. Quisling’s ordered students to join the Nazi Youth, ordered all the teachers to join the Nazi teachers’ union, ordered us all to teach the Nazi curriculum.” He pauses, looking around the totally silent room. “We teachers have to refuse, all fourteen thousand of us, and you have to make sure your parents  forbid you to join the Nazi Youth.”
	Hans raises his hand. “If we refuse, what will the Germans do?”
	Mr. Lund’s hand smoothes back his mostly grey hair. “I have no idea. But, Hans, we don’t have a choice. They’ll go after other organizations too, but we’re the first. It’s up to us  to set the standard for resistance.” He looks around the room. “That means each of you.” 
	Everyone’s intent on Mr. Lund’s words. I look around. I can’t tell what’s going on inside Marta or Bjorn or Anders or Britt or any of the others. I only know what talk of the Nazis and the resistance does to my insides. I’m nauseous, sweating, wondering if I can make it to the bell. 
					*		*		*
	The underground sends out a protest statement and thousands of teachers sign it. Tens of thousands of parents also sign a protest statement. Mama says it’s a miracle, how the word got out to all the small towns and villages without even using the telephone. Papa says trying to turn Norwegian children into little Nazis will only make the resistance stronger.
	Every day there are rants in the Nazi-controlled papers about disloyal teachers. Then Quisling orders the schools closed and arrests a thousand teachers. Mr. Lund is one of them.


	March 15. The pier is crowded with people come to support five-hundred teachers being loaded on a ship bound for Kirkenes, for the Arctic. Papa says the ship is in bad shape and only meant to hold two hundred fifty, says they’ll be packed in like animals. Tears run down a lot of faces as the grey monster pulls away from the dock. We sing hymns. We sing our love for them. It’s cold. So cold.
	Will we ever see Mr. Lund again?

	Another five hundred teachers get sent to the arctic from southern Norway. Letters arrive, smuggled out of the Kirkenes camp. They’re copied and passed around — forced labor building roads and unloading ships alongside Russian prisoners of war, no changes of clothes soaked from working in the snow, lack of food, lack of medicine. I try not to think how unprepared Mr. Lund and the other teachers are for working in conditions like that. Mr. Lund’s a total bookworm, doesn’t even ski. How will he survive?
	The letters also tell of prisoner choirs and lectures and that really gets to me. Where do they find the courage to carry on, to endure, to resist, to overcome their fear?
	Why can’t I?

					Chapter 40
					   KARI
	I’m stuffing books into my knapsack, ready to leave the library when I feel someone standing behind me. It’s Anna. 
	“Here,” she says. She hands me a note and hurries away.
	What’s this about? We haven’t spoken in months. I unfold her note: “Kari — I have to see you. Meet me at the park near the river after school. PLEASE!”
	Anna. My best friend since kindergarten — until last year when she decided her Nazi was more important than our friendship. I couldn’t believe it! How could she do that when she knows how I hate them, how we all hate them?
	Anna. Beautiful Anna. Even when we were little she made our mothers’ hand-me-downs look amazing when we played dress-up, made Lotte and me look like frumps next to her. 
Her blonde hair’s never seen a scissors. She braids it and twists it into a crown on top of her head, at Midsummer. She’s like a Viking princess. 
	Anna, the first to get curves while Lotte and I wondered if we ever would. 
	Anna. People stare when she walks by, men and women both.
	Anna. So sweet. So trusting. Such a good friend — until the Nazis.   
	Her last words. She spat them out — “You judge me? When you know what happens at home? You’ve seen the bruises. I’m finally going after something that’s just for me. He loves me, Kari, I know he does.” She held up her wrist, showed me the silver bracelet. “He gives me beautiful things. He says I’m worth it —  and I believe him. You hate the Germans, but they’re going to win, and when they do I’ll be on the right side. Where will you be, Kari? It’s stupid to fight them. Don’t you see? Don’t you get it?”
	And then she said “Just keep your sermons to yourself, Kari. Just stay out of my life!’
	It hurt when she said that. It still hurts now.
 
  	She’s waiting when I get to the park, sitting on a swing in the last light of day, wearing a red coat, a new red coat. The melt-swollen river is loud behind her. She sees me and stands up.
	“So, what is it Anna?”
	I look closer. Her face is puffy. She’s been crying. Her cheeks are still wet.
	“Oh, Kari,” she says and then she’s sobbing too hard to say anything.
	“Anna, come on. Tell me.”
	“Kari. I’m pregnant!” She chokes it out.
	“Anna, no! Do your parents know?” When she raises her face there’s terror in her eyes — with good reason. 
	“You know I can’t tell them. You know my father’s temper. Fritz is the only one who knows.”
	“What did he say? What’s he going to do? You’re not marrying him are you, not marrying a German?”
	A bitter laugh. “Ha! Don’t worry. There won’t be a wedding. Kari, I believed all his lies, believed he loved me. How could I have been so stupid? All he cares about is the Fuhrer’s baby.” She pats her still flat belly
	“What are you talking about?”
	“German soldiers. They’re ordered to sleep with Norwegian girls, make little Vikings  for the Third Reich —  babies with pure Aryan blood. That’s what he said when I told him.” 
	This is too strange. “You’re joking, Anna. You’re making this up.”
	She shakes her head. “It’s no joke, Kari, it’s a whole program — babies for the state. They call it Lebensborn.” She shudders, takes a deep breath, squeezes her eyes closed. She rushes on. “Fritz says I’ll have to go to Oslo, to Hurdal Verk, a place for girls like me with krigsbarna — war babies. He says when it’s born they’ll take it to Germany. ” She’s sobbing again. 
	“Oh, Anna. You have to tell your parents.”
	“Are you kidding? You know I can’t. They’d throw me out — or worse.”
	Of course she’ll have to tell them, but I don’t push it, not with the hopeless look on her face. She’s right, her father’s brutal. I’ve seen the black and blue marks for the slightest thing. What would he do to her over something like this? I don’t know what to say.
	Finally I ask “What are you going to do?” It’s a stupid question. I ask it anyway.  
	“Maybe I’ll just go to the river and .  .  .”
	“Don’t say that, Anna. Don’t you dare even think it!”
	Her arms are around me and I’m hugging her, feeling her body jerk with sobs, knowing there’s not a thing I can do to help her. The river races by, making gurgling noises, and behind my closed eyes I see Anna in the icy water, struggling for breath, the red coat pulling her down. I hug her tighter, much tighter.
				*		*	`	*
 
	Sleep won’t come. 
	Anna, oh Anna, what have you done? A bastard fathered by a Nazi. The shame of it. Bad enough if you have normal parents, but ever since we were little, the slightest thing — just being late coming home —  could get her a beating. And now this. 
	Lebensborn. Babies for the Third Reich. Norwegian girls as incubators. One more unbelievable thing to add to the growing list. What’s happened to the rules? There aren’t any anymore, not when you can get tortured or worse for  producing underground news sheets to counter German lies, not when being born Jewish makes it alright to seize your business, arrest you, deport you, kill you. Not when you don’t know who to trust anymore, when someone down the street might turn you in to the Nazi monsters.
	What happened to that safe, boring world where you knew the rules and maybe you wanted to break them, and maybe you did sometimes, but at least the rules made sense? Maybe Anna’s right. Maybe this is our future and it will go on forever. After all, the Nazis are rolling over Europe, one country after another. Who is there to drive them out? The Brits from their puny island? The Americans from thousands of miles away? How likely is that? How likely is it that anyone can stop them?
		
					Chapter 41
					   KARI	
	I try not to think about Anna. I tell myself it’s her own damn fault for being so stupid, for being taken in by the lying German bastard. It’s not working. We’ve been friends for too long. Also, she hasn’t been at school and I’m worried about what might have happened to her. After school I head to the Terazen Cafe. Anna’s behind the counter. Then she’s hugging me. I hug her back.
	“Can you talk?” I ask. It looks like she’s about to cry. She nods. We sit across from each other in a booth at the back. “What’s going on, you haven’t been at school?”
	She shakes her head. 
	“I’m working full time. I’ll need the money. I’m on the train to Oslo on Monday.”
	“What? Oh, no, Anna.”
	“Fritz says everything’s arranged. They’re expecting me at Herdal Verk. I’ll join all the other girls producing babies for the fuhrer.”
	“Anna, what about your parents? They can stop this.”
	“Stop it? They can’t wait for me to leave. Kari, they told me not to come home when this is all over!” Tears spill down her cheeks and I reach across the table and take her hand. “They’re  ashamed to be my parents. They want me out of Trondheim before anyone notices my belly.”  
	I don’t know what to say. I squeeze her hand.
	“What am I going to do? I don’t have a school certificate. I don’t have any skills. I’ve never been out of Trondheim. I don’t even know anyone in Oslo. Kari, I’m so scared!”
					Chapter 42
					    KARI
	Saturday morning. I tell Mama I’m headed for Lotte’s as usual and maybe I’ll get there later, but not now. I don’t want to be around people — not even Lotte. Not yet. I need to get away, just be by myself. I head out of town into the forest. The sun’s full up. A few trickles of water make their way through the underbrush. Another month and there’ll be brand new streams birthed by the  winter melt high up the mountain. Lotte and Anna and I used to love  stomping through them, seeing how big a splash we could make.
	Lotte and Anna and me. I know where I’m going.  
	The three of us found the cave that summer day when we were nine. Actually, Lotte’s dog Balder  was the one who discovered it. We were following a deer trail through some brambles when he ran ahead of us and disappeared. We looked all over, calling him. Finally, he appeared from behind the scraggly bush that hid the entrance to the cave.
	I haven’t been here in years, but that scraggly bush is still there, leafless now. I push past its bare branches into the cave. It seemed so much bigger all those years ago when we were way smaller. I brush away a carpet of leaves half covering broken pieces of the dishes we smuggled from home. The ring of charcoal where we built totally forbidden fires is still there. So are the remains of the faded blanket we wrapped up in when we’d huddle close to the fire on a chilly spring day like today.
	So are the memories.
	I smile, thinking about the May night our parents finally gave us permission to sleep in the cave and how we told ghost stories until every forest sound had to be trolls just beyond the fire light, and the shadows from the fire playing on the cave walls turned into monsters, sure to be coming for us. We raced home, terrified, and never asked to sleep in the cave again. Still, it was always there for us, our special place, where we went to share fears and troubles and hopes and dreams and crushes. And secrets. We were so sure we’d be best friends forever, that nothing and no-one could separate us. We were we so impatient to grow up. Now I wonder why.
	I sit on the flat rock at the entrance where we used to bake mud pies, and look over the tree tops down to the wind-ruffled sea. The view is still amazing. The waves still crash against the rocky shore far far below. I reach out a finger and stroke a tiny bud on the bare bush. It won’t be naked long. These fragile buds will swell and burst and dress the scraggly branches in chartreuse green.
	I take a deep breath and inhale the scent of the forest. Humans have messed up so bad but nature’s not paying any attention. Life’s getting ready to explode. Snow will melt, waves will crash, buds will burst, spring will come again and again and all of this will still be here no matter what horrible things humans do.
	That’s comforting, somehow.
	But Anna. No turning back the clock, no way to undo what you’ve done.
	 I have to believe the world can change, that the Nazis aren’t forever, that one day they’ll be gone, that one day life will make sense again, that the teachers sent north will come home to us, that Mr. Lund will be one of them. I have to hang on to that no matter what.
	But Anna can’t wait for that ‘one day.’  She’s desperate for help now. And there’s nothing anyone can do to save her from this nightmare.
	 				
					Chapter 43
					  JURGEN
	Jurgen is at the back of the butcher shop, scrubbing down the bloody chopping block. The bell on the outside door jangles. Six p.m. They’re supposed to be closed, but it’s Wednesday — the day the Gestapo delivers cigarettes and aquavit to his father in exchange for leads on hidden livestock. Meat’s getting scarce — even for the Germans. 
	Jurgen waits for the usual ‘Heil Hitler’ greeting.
	“Hvordan gor det, Leif?”
	Norwegian?
	Jurgen peers through a gap in the swinging doors, sees the shocked look on his father’s face gone white. 
	“I was expecting Gunther,” his father stutters.
	“Guess you’ll have to settle for me.”
	Henry Rinnan, the devil himself, more brutal than any Nazi, head of the Rinnan gang — ten feet away, smiling at his father! 
	“Sorry,” his father says. “Not much to report this week.”
	“That’s alright, Leif,” Rinnan says. “Our German friends have a new job for you. They’re after a different kind of information. You know every farmer within twenty miles of Trondheim, right? And there are all your customers.” A back pat. “You’re a clever guy, Leif. You can help us find out who’s for us and who’s against us — mostly who’s against us. I told them I was sure you could do that. Was I right?” 
	His father’s head is nodding like he can’t stop. “You came to the right man. Just yesterday Anders Bengtson was in  here cursing the occupation.” A sly smile. “Buying drinks might loosen some tongues, but I’d need your help with that.”
	“Not to worry.” Rinnan takes an envelope from his coat pocket. “This should do it. You’ll let me know when you need more.” He gives Jurgen’s father a shoulder punch. “Knew I could count on you, Leif. See you in a week.” 
	The bell jangles again and he's gone. 
	Jurgen pushes through the swinging doors. His father is counting money from the envelope. 
	“You can’t do this!” 
	His father turns toward him, eyes narrowed. “I’ll let you know when I want your opinion. Get back to work.”
	He should shut his mouth like he always does, like he’s done all his life. Don’t rile him. Avoid a beating.   
	Not this time. 
	“Papa, you know what they’ll do to anyone you rat on. They don’t even try to hide it. How can you turn someone in when you know what will happen to them?”
	“You little snot!,” his father growls. “Back to work. Now! If you know what’s good for you.”  
	Jurgen doesn’t move. He stands there, staring at this man who has made his life a misery for as long as he can remember. A coldness runs through him, freezing the fear that’s dominated his life. His father comes for him, fist raised, yellow teeth barred. Jurgen doesn’t move. Not this time. Legs planted on the sawdust covered floor. Strength rising from the soles of his feet through calf muscles, iron strong, through hips anchored to a torso of clenched muscle. Strength flowing through hard hard biceps to fists that clench and throb with rage and hurt he’s pushed down for too long.
	His father swings. Jurgen takes the blow, then punches up sending him half way across the shop into the display case, shattering the glass. His father sinks to the floor, whimpering in the sawdust, holding his jaw, blood streaming from his nose. 
	Jurgen shakes his head. That’s all it took? One blow? He should have done it sooner, should have understood he’s not that little kid anymore — he’s bigger and stronger than this monster, this coward who calls himself his father. 
	Jurgen pulls on his jacket and hat, steps over Leif Johansen, and heads out into the dark.  
					Chapter 44
					    KARI
	There’s a knock on the door. I look up from my homework. Mama stops mending socks.  It’s way past curfew. It could only be the Germans. Papa rolls up the charts he’s been studying and puts them behind the kitchen stove. He goes to the door. I focus on looking normal. 
	“Jurgen? Come in,” Papa says.
	I swing around. I can’t believe what I see. It’s him, alright, but one eye’s almost swollen shut and there’s blood smeared all over his face.
	“Sorry,” Jurgen says, “I didn’t know where else to go.”
	“What happened, lad? The Germans?”
	Jurgen staggers to the kitchen table and sits in the chair Mama pulls out.
	“No. Worse. My father.” He chokes on the words like he’s about to cry. “Henry Rinnan  came to the shop, said the Nazis want to know what people  are saying about them, anything anti--German, so my dad told him what Anders Bengsten had said — that harmless old man. Who knows what the Rinnan gang will do to him?” He’s shaking. “I can’t take it anymore!”
	“Of course you can’t,” Mama says, wiping blood from his face.
	“He punched me. I don’t know what happened, I just went berserk, knocked him to the floor.” he takes a gulp of air. “I can’t go back there. I won’t!” 
	“It’s alright,” Papa says. “You stay here until we find you a better place. Kari, I need to talk to both of you.”
	I take a seat across from Jurgen.
	“Henry Rinnan.” Papa takes his time lighting his pipe. “A nobody until the Germans showed up, a delivery driver, but he knew a lot folks, knew what side they were on. The Germans made him into an informer. Now it’s not just him. He’s recruited dozens of traitors. They keep their ears open in shops or bars, even schools, listening for anti-German talk.” He draws on his pipe. “They have this house known as the gang monastery where they torture people to get them to talk, even more brutal than the Gestapo at the Mission Hotel, if that’s possible. Folks have been killed there. The Rinnan gang is evil, more dangerous than the Nazis because you don’t know who they are.” He looks at each of us in turn.
	“Listen, Kari, Jurgen — you have to be extra careful what you say. Never talk about the Nazis in front of anyone you don’t trust completely. Promise me you won’t.” We both nod. “And warn your friends. Right away.”
	Making fun of the Nazi monsters was a release valve. No More. My mind’s racing, trying to remember conversations — things I might have said, who I might have said them to. I reach across the table and take Jurgen’s hand. He closes his unswollen eye and squeezes my fingers.
				*		*		*
	“Do you remember being that size?” Mama asks.
	We’re sitting on a park bench watching the dozen or so outdoor school students sitting at picnic tables slurping soup from their thermoses. I’m helping out because Mama’s normal helper, Mrs. Dahl, is sick. I’m  in charge of the two to four-year-olds, multi--colored little bundles, totally round in  snowsuits and hoods and mittens and boots.   
	“It was always such a struggle to get you and Jurgen to take off your skis and sit long enough for lunch. His mother and I used to laugh watching the two of you, so caught up in each other, in your own little world, not caring a bit about the others.”
	I do remember. Mostly how I couldn’t wait to get to the park and Jurgen, my first friend. And our competition — who could get to the top of the ski hill first, who would be fastest to the bottom. Also our fights, though not what they were about. The two of us would roll around in the snow until we started laughing instead of punching each other.
	“You know, Kari, if it weren't for Jurgen you wouldn’t be half the skier you are today. He always pushed you to go faster, down a steeper slope, over higher jumps.”
	“Well, Mama, I always pushed him, too.”
	She nods. “When  you were older the two of you would take off on your own and I knew I’d never hear about your close calls.” 
	I grin. “There were a few of those, but we survived.”
	The little ones are finishing their lunch, laughing and giggling, giving each other punches they can barely feel through all the layers. Time to help the two and three-year-olds buckle on their tiny skis. Mama’s taking the big kids further up the hill.
	“Let’s go,” I say. My gang of littles follows me up the slight incline. They’re a noisy bunch. Mari wants my help. She grabs one end of my ski pole and we start down the hill, side by side. Half way down she lets go. 
	“Good, Mari,” I call, “remember, make your triangle if you want to slow down.” She pays no attention, tucks her tiny body to go faster and speeds all the way to the bottom without falling, laughing and screaming the whole way. 
	They’re discovering the thrill of it. I love that. It happens so fast when they’re little. They fall, they get up, they fall again. But there’s no fear and the only tears come when it’s time to go home.
	True little Norwegians, in love with the snow, in love with winter, in love with speed, always wanting more. When I’m with them I can laugh and forget what’s going on in town, in the rest of the country, in the world, because nothing’s changed here. It’s been like this for generations. And it’s so precious. Way too precious to lose.
		
					Chapter 46
					   KARI
	All weekend I’ve been jumpy, waiting for Jurgen to get back from his first mission — guiding a resistance leader on the first leg of his escape to Sweden. He should have been home by now. He said he’d be back in time for school on Monday so that no-one would get suspicious, but he hasn’t shown up. Probably he went right to school.
	I wait for him outside the main entrance as kids stream in, even though it’s freezing and my ‘good’ coat, the one Mama sewed from our heaviest blanket, isn’t nearly enough to keep me warm just standing there. I try jogging in place. It doesn’t help, just gets me looks. Ilse and her gang sweep past. They look my way, laughing.
	The last of the stragglers hurries through the wide doors. I give up and follow them. I probably just missed him somehow.  I search the crowded hallways after every class, asking everyone we know if they’ve seen him.
	No-one has.
	My brain’s concocting horrible what ifs. What if he got lost in a sudden snow storm. Or maybe whoever he was guiding wasn’t strong enough to make it through the mountains. Or what if he was followed, what if the Rinnan gang found out about him? What if that happened? My brain starts to paint that picture. I won’t let it. I won’t.
	In chemistry I struggle to focus on the formulas Mrs. Haugen is writing on the board but they blur, turn into nonsense. I try humming the latest swing song under my breath in history but what I hear is his calls for help. By math, the last class of the day, I’m digging my fingernails into my palms to drive out the images — so hard I break the skin. Even that doesn’t work. 
	I fight the after school surge of students headed for the doors on my way to Coach Andersen’s office. He’s already explaining the new cross country track on the blackboard. I search the room. Every member of the team’s here — except  Jurgen.
	I duck out, sprint through the hallways, out into the dark, barely notice the cold or the snow that’s started to fall as I race home. Maybe Papa’s heard something. Maybe he can find out.
		
                                                       	Chapter 47 
					    KARI  
	He’s been missing for two whole days. Sven and I set out with sleds. My heart’s a stone inside me. Neither of us says what we’re thinking, what we’re fearing. The Rinnan gang. The untouchables. The Gestapo’s happy to let them torture anyone who opposes the Nazis — before they kill them.
	We head East, up through the forest, boughs drooping under the weight of last night’s late snow. We have no words. We’re silent as the trees. There are no tracks to follow, but Sven knows the route Jurgen would have taken. We ski on. An hour into the forest and I’m beginning to think maybe we were wrong to be so worried, maybe they’re totally fine, resting right now in one of the hideouts on the way to the Swedish border.
	Ahead of me, Sven stops. He holds up his hand. I know what that means.   
	We stand and look, not wanting to scrape away the snow, uncover what it’s hiding. Sven kneels and starts to gently brush away the white powder.
	I don’t recognize him. I let out the breath I’ve been holding.
	Sven moves to the other snow covered mound. I want to stop him because I know what we’ll see because those are Jurgen’s skis planted in the snow — the ones he was so proud of.
	I can’t watch. I turn away but I still hear the faint sound as Sven brushes away the snow. Then silence.
	I make myself turn back.
	Jurgen lies curled up like he’s resting. Sven turns him over and I double up like I’ve been punched in the gut. What have they done to him? I hardly recognize his face. There’s a pool of red in the snow, solid now, and his championship jacket is peppered with bullet holes. The cold reaches beyond my toes, beyond my fingers, to deep inside me and I stand there staring at my lifeless friend, only vaguely hearing Sven calling my name, unable to move, unable to speak, unable to cry until Sven’s stinging slap brings me back into this world of pain and grief and he’s hugging me saying he’s so sorry for doing that and then his words stop and his sobs start and mine do too. 
	We load the bodies on the sleds and start for Trondheim. Jurgen is on the sled in front of me. It’s hard to believe it’s really him because he was never that still. My mind fills with images of him barreling down the side of the mountain, his whoop as he flew off the edge of a cliff, soaring, graceful as any bird, landing in the powder below, laughing. Always laughing. 


	Dr. Funseth  opens the door. “Oh, no!”  
	“The Rinnan gang,” Sven says. “We didn’t know where to take them.”  
	“Bring them in.”
	Dr. Funseth helps Sven carry the half frozen remains into his office. I just want to run. I’ve wanted to run, run anywhere, ever since we found them, but my mind keeps saying ‘Don’t leave him’ over and over again, driving out every other thought. 
	Dr. Funseth examines the bullet ridden bodies. I don’t want to watch, but I can’t turn away. 
	Finally he says “They both cheated the Rinnan gang. Died before they were shot.	
	“Cyanide?” Sven asks.
	“Looks like they had time to bite down on the capsules. They work fast — three seconds. I’ll take blood samples to be sure, but there’s the scent of almonds, and look, the skin is cherry red.” 
	Jurgen. Oh, Jurgen. You controlled your  own death. You weren’t tortured. You died doing exactly what you said you’d do. Maybe knowing that will help some day — but it doesn’t help now.  Nothing can possibly help now. 

	Sven leads me home. I follow him blindly, my skis moving on their own. It’s up to Sven to tell Mama and Papa about Jurgen. I have no words. Mama’s sobbing. I wish I could but there’s nothing going on inside me now. Everything is empty. 
	“Any idea how they found out about Jurgen?” Papa asks.
	Sven says “The Rinnan gang has informers everywhere. Maybe Jurgen told someone he shouldn’t have. Maybe he told his father.”
	“No!” It explodes out of me. “He’d never do that — he knew his father too well.” 
	“Could have been the other guy who told the wrong person,” Sven says. “We’ll probably never know.” 
	Then we just sit there because there’s too much grief in the room for talk. The only sound is the crackling of the fire.
	“The bastards! The bastards!” Papa mutters, finally.
	  	                              Chapter 48 
			                      KARI		
	The church is full, every pew packed, bodies squeezed in. Kids I hardly recognize, teachers I do recognize, some retired, some from as far back as kindergarten. Mrs. Olsen from pre--school hobbles in on her cane. All for Jurgen.
	Maybe somehow, somewhere he knows at last, really, really knows, how much he was loved. 
	Kid after kid gets up to tell Jurgen stories. It’s my turn soon. I close my eyes and the voices recede and I’m grateful for that. I need to feel him, need to see him in my mind’s eye, need to hear his teasing voice.
	Jurgen.
	Jurgen.
	“Kari?”
	“Yes, I’m here.”
	That voice, his, clear as anything. 
	“Listen. Fear is what you let it be. It cramps everything, makes you small, makes you into someone you’re not supposed to be. It trapped me for so long. You know that, Kari. But the fear is worse than whatever happens when you let it go. Are you listening? Do you hear me?”
	“I do. I do! But, Jurgen, don’t go. Please don’t leave me!”
	The voice fades. It’s gone.
	Pastor Vigeland calls my name. I stand, put on Jurgen’s red and white championship jacket, the one he was never without, the one we found him in, the one with the bullet holes.
	I walk to the front of the packed church. When I open my mouth it’s not my stilted carefully prepared words that come out, it’s Jurgen’s message, his spirit, how much he loved his friends,  this land, how ready he was to fight for it, no matter what. I hug his red and white championship jacket close around me and my voice doesn’t even quaver.
	The organ starts the final hymn.
	There’s an envelope waiting at my seat with my name on it. I recognize that writing! 

“Dear Kari,	
	You’ve been everything to me for as long as I can remember, ever since your mother started watching me because she had a three-year-old, too. You. 
	You’d laugh if I told you how the best part of my week was our skiing competition — that I really didn’t care if I won as long as I could be with you. 
	You’d really laugh if I told you how I pretended to be interested in art so it wouldn’t look too weird when I signed up for art classes you’d be in even though it was torture because I was so bad. 
	You’d be surprised and you’d probably laugh if I told you that every hockey game I played was for you — for your cheers, for your after-game hugs. Boy, how I waited for those hugs.
	You tell me I’m crazy for getting involved with the Resistance.  I have to do what I can to stop the monsters, Kari. I’m not Erik, but I’m as brave as he is. 
	I’ll never tell you any of this in person, but in case something happens to me, I want you to know how much I love you. 
	Your Jurgen”
	The church fills with the hymn, the booming organ, so many voices, but all I hear is  the sound of my own sobs.
	Then Lotte is there, her arms around me in the emptying church. 
	“It’s my fault. He did it because of me.”
	“Stop it, Kari, you know that’s not true.”
	I show her the letter. She shakes her head. There are tears in her eyes, too. “It’s beautiful.”
	“Lotte, I pretended it was just a silly crush. Deep down I knew better. I was too much of a coward to tell him that I loved him so much, but in a different way. If I’d done that maybe he wouldn’t  have —--“
	“Now you’re being ridiculous. Jurgen was making up for his jerk of a father. You know that. He was no different from the rest of us, Kari. He loved Norway. He did what he had to do.”
			*			*			*
	
	I toss and turn, too filled with images of the packed church and the flower decked coffin. The guilty memories don’t go away despite what Lotte said. I brushed him off, paid no attention to what I saw in his eyes. I was a coward.
	I failed him.
	A movement of air. I open my eyes. Strange. The sheer curtains at my window billow — but the window’s closed. Weirder still, they take the shape of a girl dressed in white, a wreath of candles on her head, their glow lighting her, lighting  the whole room.
	Santa Lucia!   
	I sit up. She smiles at me and I’m not afraid and the warmth that comes from her envelops me and I’m glowing too and my room isn’t my room at all and it’s filled with the perfume of a thousand flowers.
	She raises a hand to her crown, takes one of the candles and holds it out to me. I reach for it, reach for the light.
	“Let go of the fear, Kari. Let it go.” Jurgen’s voice!
	She takes another step toward me. If I touch that candle I know I will be safe and strong and no longer afraid. I grasp it. I inhale the perfume that fills my room and when I exhale and my breath leaves me, so does the fear.
	The weight of it is gone. 
	Jurgen’s precious gift.
	I sleep like I haven’t in a long, long, time.

	Morning. Was it a dream? A vision? I don’t care. Whatever it was, the crushing paralyzing fear is gone.
	Jurgen’s championship jacket hangs on the back of my chair. 
				*		*		*
										
	I head to Mr. Hagen’s room as soon as classes are over. He looks surprised to see me. I close the door.
	“I’m ready,” I say. 
	He doesn’t ask for what. He just nods, opens a desk drawer and pulls out a map of Trondheim. He spreads it out on the desk.
	“Here,” he says pointing at the port. “It’s a huge project — includes submarine bunkers. We need drawings with size and distance estimates. And here.” He points to German bases spread around Trondheim. “Layout, activity, routines, presence of prisoners, officers quarters, barracks — any information you can get. And, of course there’s the giant airport they’re building — drawings would be really valuable.”
	“I’ll do what I can.”
	He folds up the map. “Are you sure, Kari? You know what could happen.  Can you tell me what’s changed?”
	I give him a smile and shake my head and hug Jurgen’s championship jacket close.
				      Chapter 49
			                      KARI
	Eggs are like gold. The Nazis want them all. No more taking them into town to Bakke’s Grocery. Lotte has a regular Saturday route now — during the week she picks up eggs from five farms and on Saturday she delivers them to three German bases. She’s surprised when I show up on Saturday morning, even more surprised when I ask to come along.
	“You didn’t even want to help me deliver the news. Now you want to enter the monster’s den? What’s going on, Kari?”
	“Jurgen,” I say.  I don’t have to say any more. Best friends don’t need a lot of explaining.  
	“Alright. Come on, then.” 
	We harness Freya and Fru Hest and load the crates of eggs she’s collected. 
	“You may as well drive,” Lotte says. “You really need the practice.”
	Normally I’d be excited to hold those reins, feel the connection to those powerful bodies. Not today. The only thing I feel is the old fear trying to take over. I can’t let that happen.
	“Our first stop is the prisoner of war camp,” Lotte says. “Prepare yourself. It’s not pretty.”
	“Go on.” Keep talking, get me out of my head.
	“They’re Russians, mainly. Slave labor. Two thousand of them. They load them in trucks and haul them to the port every day for two twelve hour shifts. They’re building those submarine bunkers. We'll probably see a few of the sick ones they leave behind.”
	“And the eggs are for them?”
	“Of course not. The eggs go to the commandant’s kitchen. No idea what they feed the prisoners but it can’t be much from the looks of them. Mama sends along a bag of boiled potatoes every week. One of the Norwegian guards distributes them. His name’s Olav. He’s alright, one of the better ones. He’s used to seeing me, but you’d better give him your flirtiest smile.” 
	The cheery jingling of the harness bells doesn’t sit right with images of a Norwegian guard handing out cold boiled potatoes to skeletal Russians — or with my nausea. 
	Then we’re at the high barbed wire fence and I can’t believe I’m doing this and Lotte is waving to the guard opening the gate. 
	“My friend Kari’s helping me today.”
	I give him what I hope is a reassuring smile. No return smile; the grim look on his face doesn’t change. He checks the contents of the sleigh. 
	“Any new arrivals?” Lotte asks.
	“About a hundred this week — replacements for those that didn’t make it.” He points beyond the barbed wire fence to a graveyard with newly dug graves. Lots of newly dug graves.
	Lotte hands him the sack of potatoes. “Maybe  this will keep a few of them alive,” she says.
	Olav shrugs and waves us through the gate.
	Lotte says “That wasn’t so bad, was it?”
	“Are you kidding?” My heart’s thudding in my chest like it wants out. Get a grip. I take deep breaths. It helps a little.
	There are barracks on both sides of us. I hand the reins to Lotte and my shaky hand feels for the mini-notebook in my jacket pocket.
	“I’ve figured out how to get rough measurements.” I realize I’m whispering. “The horses have a steady walking gate. If I count their strides I can get the length of the barracks and the distances between them.”
	“Not bad,” Lotte says. She drapes a blanket over our laps. “Just keep your note-taking out of sight.”
	There’s only one road through the camp and the Commandant’s house is at the far end.	
	I start counting strides, make myself breathe normally — until we pass the second barracks and two prisoners step out. I want to look away but I can’t. A few patches of colorless hair stand up on their scalps. Grey skin sags over cheekbones. Rags hang off their shoulders. They stumble along beside us, one of them supporting the other, heading for the latrine between the barracks.
	“I told you,” Lotte says. “Better not to look.”
	But they’ve stopped, turned toward us, and the stronger one is staring at me like he’s daring me to look away.  I can’t. Without thinking I grab my lunch bag and hold it out to him. His face changes, deadened eyes light up then go suspicious. I lean toward him, stretching as far as I can. He steps toward me. His fingers brush mine as he grabs the bag — nothing but bone. Then he’s tearing it open and the contents fall to the ground and both of them are on their hands and knees retrieving sticks of dried moose meat, stuffing their mouths. 
	We’re past them and I force my eyes to look straight ahead, but I still see them. I’ll always see them. 
				*			*			*
	
	“Pull up a chair, Kari,” Mr. Hagen says the next day. I unroll the drawing I made — the layout of the prisoner of war camp. The art room door opens.
	Ilse.
	 She stands in the doorway staring at us.
	“Yes?” Mr. Hagen says. “Can I help you, Ilse?”
	She smirks. “No, Mr. Hagen. I wouldn’t want to interrupt anything.” She closes the door, hard. Her tone of voice. The look on her face. She means trouble. She always means trouble. 
	
	By noon the next day I’m getting odd looks. What’s going on? Lotte catches up with me after chemistry.
	“She’s done it again,” she says. “Ilse and her gang are telling everyone you’re so desperate to win the art scholarship you’ll do anything. She says she walked in on you and Mr. Hagen yesterday, the two of you cuddled up close.” 
	Not that! “I was just showing him my drawing, explaining what we saw at the camp. Besides, he doesn’t even have a say in who gets the scholarship.” 
	“Of course. I know that, but who else does?”
	Ilse. Again. I feel cheap and dirty, like I’ve actually done something wrong.
					Chapter 51
					  LOTTE
	Someone‘s in the house! Lotte sits up in bed, listening. There it is again. She didn’t dream it. Dusky summer light outside and her clock says 1 a.m. She opens the bedroom door and stands on the landing, listening. The door to the storeroom is ajar. If only she had something, anything to hold in her hand, some sort of weapon. Lotte descends the stairs, avoiding the steps that squeak, mouth dry, heart pumping. The door opens further. The intruder steps out of the store room.
	“Erik!” She lets out the breath she’d been holding. “What are you doing here? You scared me to death!” 
	“Shhh!” he whispers. “I don’t want to wake Mama and Papa. I have a couple of days before I have to be back — and the salmon are running. I just came to get my rod.”
	Of course. Erik has never missed the salmon’s homecoming. Not even a war is going to stop him.
	“I’m coming, too,” Lotte says. “We can take the horses.” She sees the look on his face. “You can’t say no, Erik. I haven’t seen you in months.” She runs up the stars. “I’ll meet you in the barn.”
	Lotte pulls on her clothes and writes the note she’ll leave on the kitchen table “Gone fishing. Home tonight.” Details can wait. At least they’ll know she hasn’t been abducted or worse.
	Erik helps her saddle Fru Hest and Freya. “You know this is crazy, right?”
	She just shrugs. “You owe me a lot more than one day off the farm, Erik. Where are we going?”
	“To the Nidelva, the same bend in the river I’ve fished eve since I could hold a rod. It’s not that far.”
	They set off at a cantor, Erik leading the way. The sun is fully up now making the rain soaked foliage glitter. The horses splash through rivulets and streams, scolded by birds out for an early breakfast and it’s almost like this is just another beautiful June morning in normal times and their only concern is locating the perfect spot for a day’s fishing. 
	They hear the river before they see it. Then the trees thin and there it is, rapids leaping and exploding over mid-stream boulders. 
	“This is it. Perfect,” Erik says. “Now watch.”
	 The flick of a tail and a long silver body leaps from the frothy rapids, hits the boulders and falls back. Mid-river another salmon breaks the surface, a glistening torpedo, leaping, fighting the air. It lands with a splash in the calm water above the rapids. They are monster fish, fattened in the ocean for years, building the energy to fight their way up the river to the stream where they hatched, saving just enough energy to mate and die.
	“You ready?” Erik asks.
	“What do you mean?”
	“You’re here to fish aren't you?”
	“No, of course not, Erik. I just want a day out with you.”
	“Well, that’s what you’re going to have— while fishing.” Erik says, putting the rod together. He takes a small box from his knapsack, his precious collection of flies, and attaches one — red and black feathers with hairs from Saga’s tail.
	“Look at my grip — thumb on top. Now watch — smooth acceleration.”  The rod goes back then forward, the line snaking out in front of them, landing mid-river. 
	“Come on, Erik. I’ll never be able to do that.”
	“We’ll do it together, Lotte. Come here.” He puts his hand over hers and their arms move together, back and forward, back and forward. “Think of a clock face. On your back cast the rod stops at ten. On your front cast it stops at two.”
	More practice. Finally Erik says “Good coordination. You’re ready to give it a try.” He seesw the look on Lotte’s face. “Hey, it doesn’t have to be fancy — all we’re doing is getting the fly in front of a fish.” 
	Maybe that’s what he thinks is going on but this isn’t only about fishing. This is about proving she’s more than a baby sister, that she’s someone to take seriously. Lotte steps to the edge of the water and casts.
	“Not bad. Reel it in and try again.”
	This time the fly lands farther out. A tug on the line. The shock of it. She almost drops the rod.
	“You’ve got a bite!” Erik says. “Give me the rod!”
	“No. I’m doing this, Erik.”
	“Are you sure?” The doubt in his voice. “Alright, he’s coming toward you, reel him in, not too much. When he swims away stop reeling. Let him run, tire himself out.”
	Reel in. Let him run. Reel in. Let him run. Her arm aches, throbs. She longs to hand the rod to Erik, to let him end this. But she can’t.
	Her line holds a streamlined torpedo, untamed wild and strong, a fish that has fought it’s way from the ocean, leapt up waterfalls, evaded winter-starved bears — and all she has is a puny hook and line.
 	Her heart beats against her ribs like it’s desperate to escape, her arm nearly pulled from its socket — but she hangs on, her body one straining muscle of pain. 
	“Good! Good! You’ve got him in the shallows, Erik says. 
	There it is, thrashing at her feet. Erik reaches for the salmon, grabs its tail, heaves it out of the water for her to see, huge and glistening and beautiful.
	“Lotte, you’re a tough customer, almost as tough as a salmon!” The pride in his voice!
	She collapses against him then, exhausted, but grinning. He puts his arms around her and hugs her close and the war seems very far away.
	  				Chapter 52
					   KARI    
	Mid May. Mr. Lund is back! The Quisling government gave up! Mama says they finally figured it out —  getting the whole country furious over that one stupid law wasn’t worth it.
	I get to history class early enough to help hang the “Welcome Home” banner and write my own message on the black board.
	He opens the door and there’s a moment of silence at the sight of him. He’s so skinny and his hair’s mostly white. Also, he’s dragging his left leg. We break into a cheer and mob him! He takes in the banner and the messages. He opens his mouth, but nothing comes out. Instead he just stands there grinning, tears running down his cheeks. I’m tearing up too. And I’m not the only one. This time they’re happy tears.  
 	Inside he’s still the Mr. Lund we said goodbye to, despite how he looks. Tuesday he’s ready with one of his corny history jokes. We all laugh a lot louder than we used to.

					Chapter 53
					   KARI
	Urgent banging on the front door makes me jump. I’m alone. Do I open it? It starts up again.   
	“Kari, it’s me.” Lotte. I let out the breath I’ve been holding and open the door. There’s a frantic look on her face and Freja’s behind her stamping her hooves.
	“I know where Saga is!” She races on. “Bengt Holmgren saw her. She’s in a pen of broken-down horses waiting to be slaughtered.” Her voice breaks. “I knew no-one would be able to ride her.” She grabs my arm. “We have to rescue Saga before they kill her.”
	“What do you mean, rescue her?”
	“Steal her back, of course. Now. Before it’s too late.”
	“Stealing from the Germans? Are you crazy?”
	“Listen, it can work. No-one guards a pen full of worthless animals at night. Come on. What are you waiting for?”
	Nothing’s coming out of my mouth.
	I want to tell her no, absolutely no, tell her how hard it is to keep it together when we deliver eggs, even when we have permission to be on a German base, but stealing from the monsters? My body goes rigid. The curfew. German patrols. She’s squeezing my arm, then she’s yanking at it.
	“Are you going to help me? Are you?”
	Jurgen would have said yes. I know he would have. My head nods. The rest of me wants to slam the door.  
	“When?” I say. 
	“Now. Don’t just stand there, she could be dead by tomorrow! Come on. You can ride behind me.” She’s already mounting Freya. She gives me a hand and I scramble up behind her.
	What am I doing?
	The moon’s so full you could read by it. It’s easy to see where we’re going — and very easy for a German patrol to spot us.
	She spurs Freya and we’re galloping through trees that are much to close and I have to duck under branches, my arms in a death grip around Lotte’s waist, my head glued to her back, the only sound the crack of twigs under  Freya’s pounding hooves.
	We come out of the woods and into a clearing and she slows the mare to a walk.
	“We’re close,” Lotte says. Ahead I make out the pen’s outlines and the animals inside it. Then I hear shouts, laughter, oom-pa music coming from a building just beyond the pen.  Germans! Terror fights to take over.
	 The horses have heard us. They’re bunching at the fence, bony bodies in the moonlight. Lotte slides to the ground and takes the bridle out of her knapsack. 
	“Saga,” she calls, almost a whisper. There’s a whinny from the middle of the pack and the pitiful horses scatter as the mare barges through, biting at their flanks. She reaches the fence, making snorty noises. I hardly recognize her. She’s no longer a gleaming show horse. Every rib stands out, her dull coat’s covered in mud, her mane’s a matted mess. In the moonlight I see the scabs on her sides. Spur gouges. Saga rests her head on Lotte’s shoulder, nickering softly and Lotte puts her arms around the slender neck. I hear her sob.
	“Saga,” she murmurs. I think her broken heart is mending right there in front of me.  
	“Come on” I say, “get the bridle on. We have to get out of here!”
	“All right. You open the gate. They’ll know who to come after if we only take Saga.” 
	I lift the gate latch, it opens with a screech and the horses fight to get through, rearing, plunging, screaming frustration and fear. I mount Freya. Lotte’s on Saga’s back.
	Other sounds now, shouts. German.
	“Halt!”
	They’ve seen us! We chase after the escaping horses as they scatter into the forest to the crack of gunshots, the whiz of bullets. Then the trees, the blessed trees, and the shouts grow fainter. I breathe again, the night air, cool and fresh on my face. I’m shaky and weak all over, but we did it. I did it!
	I haven’t been out of the house past curfew since the Nazis invaded, but here I am, cantering through the woods in the moonlight! Even better, tonight we hit back at the monsters. We took something from them for a change and it feels good. So good. I ride up next to Lotte. She’s grinning, too.
	“Where are we going? To your farm?”
	“No. They could come looking at our place. We’ll go to Uncle Fredrik’s. No reason they should look there.”
	The path gets steeper and we slow the horses to a walk.
	Lotte says “Uncle Fredrik prefers his goats to people. Guess you’d call him a hermit, but he has a good heart. I’m his favorite.”
	We enter a clearing. The log farmhouse and barn are silver grey in the moonlight. The goats set up a racket. The farmhouse door swings open. Uncle Fredrik’s body fills the space. He’s pulling up suspenders over a baggy shirt. A bristly beard covers half his face.
	“Hello Uncle Fredrik, it’s me, Lotte.”
	“Lotte? What on earth are you doing here in the middle of the night?”
	“We just rescued Saga from the Germans. Can she stay here? Please? I can’t take her home. She has to be somewhere they won’t look.”
	“Oh, Lotte, what have you done?”
	“It’ll be alright, Uncle Fredrik. I’ll help look after her, I promise.” He gives a big sigh.
	“Fint. She can stay — as long as she doesn’t bother the goats. There’s a stall in the barn, hay, too.” He chuckles. “For a minute I thought you’d found out about my guest.” He steps back. “Maybe you want to say hello.”
	Someone else is standing in the light of the doorway.
	Erik!
	He’s coming towards me, catches me as I slide off Freya’s back and I’m in his arms, weak kneed, breathless. He’s holding me close and I have the biggest smile on my face and all I can say is his name.
	“I’ll take care of Saga,” Lotte says.“Bet you won’t miss me.” She heads for the barn. 
	I start to say “I can’t believe it. You don’t know .  .  . “ But his lips stop my words and it’s more like I’m floating in the moonlight, like I’d float off to the stars if his arms weren’t wrapped around me. 
	He says “You can’t tell anyone I’m here, Kari, not even your parents.”
	“I know. Of course I won’t.”
	Another kiss and he whispers “Can you stay, I mean, stay the night?”
	A thrill all the way to my toes. A night with Erik. I want to, so much.
	But instead I say “I can’t. Mama and Papa don’t know where I am. They’d be frantic. But Erik, I can come again.” A shake of his head.
	“I have a job to do tomorrow, then I’m gone.”
	“Can you tell me?”
	“You know I can’t. I was trying to figure out how to see you — just in case.”
	I close my eyes and lay my head on his shoulder, wrapped in his warmth in the chilly night air, and all I want is to stay here forever in this pretend world of love and normal and the way things ought to be. 
					Chapter 54
					   ERIK
	He forces himself to let her go, feels the emptiness in his arms, watches as they ride off, until they disappear into the trees. His joy at the sight of her drains away and the familiar ache is back, the longing that gnaws at him. He’d wanted to say “Yes. Come back, soon as you can.” Wanted to say “I’ll be waiting for you, I’ll always be waiting for you.” 						Impossible words. He has a job to do. No room for distractions, not even room for Kari. He steps from the light of the moon into the dim candle-lit farm house.
	Thought chases thought. He still feels her body pressed against his. Sleep won’t come.
 	Stop it. Focus on what has to be done. What he has to do for Jurgen, gentle Jurgen. Doubts start up, struggle to take over. Why did he volunteer for this? Was he even up to it? He was supposed to be a saboteur, not an assassin, but Rinnan's gang changed everything. Tomorrow he’ll avenge Jurgen’s death — or die trying. He’ll do it for Kari and Lotte and Sven, too, the only real family Jurgen ever had.  Eric tosses on his cot, pictures the brute of a father who called Jurgen worthless, a sissy, who used him as a punching bag when he was drunk and sometimes when he wasn’t. Leif Johansen — just as much a Norwegian traitor as Henri Rinnan and just as much to blame for stealing Jurgen from them.
	Sleep won’t come. Finally he gets up, takes the Colt .45 from its hiding place, and cleans it again. He fingers the smooth yellow cyanide capsule and puts it back in his jacket pocket
	He’s as ready as he’ll ever be.
	

	Six a.m. Erik paces in front of the farm house, shivering in the scant warmth of a sun struggling to penetrate the morning mist. His contact should be here by now. Where is he? Waiting is the worst. He fights the mounting fear demanding to take over, the images of what goes on at the gang monastery. He jogs in place trying to drive them out, straining to see through morning fog that blankets the hillside.
	Movement. A figure emerges from the trees pushing a bicycle. He looks again.
	What? Heavy makeup, hoop earrings, tight sweater!  
	“Trident?” she calls.
	He nods. “Number 31?”
	She smiles. “Not what you were expecting?”
	“You could say that.” 
	She lets the bicycle fall.
	“Can we sit down? I’m winded after that hill.” Erik leads them to the rough log bench outside the farm house. “How much do you know about the target?”
	“Fill me in,” Erik says.
	“You can’t miss Henri Rinnan — he’s the shortest Norwegian male I’ve ever seen.” She hands him a photo. He studies it. A scrawny body, something feminine about the face. “They say he was bullied as a kid. He’s getting his own back now, that’s for sure, and he’s vicious. There are about fifty in his gang. They chat people up in bars, on buses, in schools, anywhere — try to identify any one sympathetic to the resistance and gain their trust.” She shakes her head. “They’ve penetrated our network. We’ve lost too many — tortured, killed, or turned over to the Gestapo, to Gerhard Flesch, Rinnan’s hero. We have to get rid of Rinnan. Losing him will disrupt their operation.” She opens a map. “The gang headquarters, what they call the monastery, is at Jonsvannsveien 46, only about a kilometer from where he lives at Landstads Vei 1, here.” She turns to Erik. “He’s almost always with his bodyguard, Karl Dolmen, even more brutal than Rinnan, if that’s possible.”
	“So when is he most vulnerable?”
	“He usually travels by himself late morning between home and the monastery. That’s probably your best bet. You know the area?” He nods.
	They sit in silence. Erik has to ask.
	“Why you?”
	She smiles. “Same old story. Men love flashy women. It was child’s play, really. I only had to chat him up in one of the bars he hangs out at, keep from yawning, listen to complaints about his miserable home life and tell him how brave he is. And, no, I’m not planning to sleep with him.  I’ve kept it up about as long as I can, giving him just enough to stay interested and hopeful — and willing to talk.” She pulls license plates out of her rucksack. “These are bogus. You’ll want to put them on the car you use so it can’t be traced.”
	“Thanks, 31.”  	
	She stands and takes Erik’s hand, squeezes it.
	“We’re counting on you, Trident. You know that. Good luck.”
                                               			
	Erik is changing the license plates on Fredrik’s jalopy when he came out of the farmhouse, yawning.
	 “What are you up to, boy?” 
	“If something goes wrong, they won’t trace this so-called car back to you,” Erik says.
	“So-called car? Don’t hurt Maud’s feelings. She’s named for the queen, you know.” Erik shakes his head. “And none of this talk about something going wrong. I’ve got one precious bottle of aquavit left, so hurry back, Erik. No better occasion to finish it off.”
	It takes two tries before the engine comes to life. Not a good start, he thinks, as the car bumps and rattles down the track.

	10 a.m. Erik drives through the neighborhood. All quiet as far as he can tell. He’d hoped to take his shot closer to Rinnan’s house, as far away as possible from the gang members, but there’s no good place to hide the car. He parks on a side street around the corner from the monastery.
	10:30. He takes up his position behind the overgrown hedge of an abandoned house with a view of the street and the entrance to the monastery.
	Late morning, she’d said. Let it happen soon! Please! But the minutes ticked by. Nothing. The jitters start as he stares at the monastery, doubts scrambling to take over. Was he up to this? Was he crazy to volunteer? He’s a good shot, but he’s only ever killed animals, never another human. Was Rinnan really human? Focus on Jurgen, what they did to him. On the others, too, so many of them. Focus on hate for the traitors who are helping the Nazis destroy the country he loves.
	He takes the cyanide capsule from his pocket, feels its reassuring smoothness, puts it in his mouth, lodges it between gum and cheek. Whatever happens, they won’t take him alive. His breathing slows.
	Then he sees the child-size body striding up the street. Just a few more seconds .  .  . 
	Now!
	He steps from behind the hedge, takes aim.
	Rinnan has seen him!
	He fires. He misses.
	“Henri!” a shout from the monastery. Rinnan jumps back. Erik fires again, but Rinnan is still standing. Then bullets whizz past his head and he sprints through the abandoned garden, over a fence, the shots and shouts following him. The jalopy is just ahead. He dives into the driver’s seat and twists the key in the ignition.
	Nothing.
	No! Come on! Come on!	
	He tries again. Maud roars to life. He hits the gas and the car leaps from the curb. He drives, paying no attention to stop signs, narrowly avoiding a collision at Hamngata, tears clouding his vision. He’s failed. That hollow worthless feeling.

	Erik parks the car next to the barn. Fredrik strides toward him, bottle in hand. He raises it, a question in his eyes. Erik shakes his head. 
	They finish the aquavit anyway.  

  
  
BBC WORLD NEWS: SEPTEMBER 16, 1942 — PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT SPOKE AT THE COMMISSIONING OF THE HNoMS KING HAAKON VII SUBMARINE CHASER, NORWEGIAN CROWN PRINCESS MARTHA  AT HIS SIDE. HE SAID “IF THERE IS ANYONE WHO STILL WONDERS WHY THIS WAR IS BEING FOUGHT, LET HIM LOOK TO NORWAY. IF THERE IS ANYONE WHO HAS ANY DELUSIONS THAT THIS WAR COULD HAVE BEEN AVERTED, LET HIM LOOK TO NORWAY; AND IF THERE IS ANYONE WHO DOUBTS THE DEMOCRATIC WILL TO WIN, AGAIN, I SAY, LET HIM LOOK TO NORWAY”		 
					Chapter 55
					   KARI
	October’s here. The dark is winning, day by day, minute by minute and I’m longing for snow to bring it’s own kind of light. I hate this in-between time, when the never-dark of summer fades into the always-dark of winter and even if you know better you could start to worry that maybe someone stole the sun and we’ll be trapped in this gloom forever. 
	This in-between time. It’s easy to believe the dark is conquering everything that’s warm, squeezing out joy and laughter, turning smiles sour, making it harder every day to get out of bed, harder to face the day, harder to face the Germans.
	 It’s sad enough in normal times, but with Nazi’s everywhere making the dark so much worse,  the memory of warmth and sunshine is even harder to conjure up.
	

	It’s happened. We’d heard and we grieved the murders in Bergen and Oslo, said prayers for their families in church, our helpless anger stoked by the senseless killing of innocents, knowing we couldn’t do a thing to stop it.
	But then, on October 7, it happened to us, to Trondheim, and my head’s a mess. I’ve never seen Papa like this — cursing, smashing things, stomping through the house, crazy with anger and grief. I keep thinking it can’t be true because we know these people. He and Mama were good friends with Captain Finn Berg and Per Lykke who is a ship owner. We knew most of the others, too, the theater director, the editor of the paper, the bank president.
	Yesterday the Germans posted red martial law notices all over the city and now. Reichskommissar Terboven, the Nazi responsible for the occupation of the whole country, is in Trondheim. He’s called the murders “atonement sacrifices” for the two German police officers killed in Majavatn, 200 kilometers from Trondheim.
	Terbhoven called a public meeting in the main square and announced by loudspeaker that at 6 p.m. ten of our people would be murdered in the woods near Falstad concentration camp. Eight of them were being held a block away at Gestapo headquarters in the Mission Hotel and that’s how they heard of their coming deaths. 
	Papa and Mama are out now, doing what they can to comfort the widows of their lost friends. How hopeless is that? The martial law curfew's from  8 p.m. to 5 a.m., so they’ll be home soon. 
	I can’t sit still. I wander from room to room, pick up a book and put it down, look for something to eat, then decide I’m not hungry. My mind’s going in circles. How can such powerful men be gone — just like that, when just a few days ago they were going about their business, about Trondheim’s business, and coming home to families who loved them?   


	They murder another fifteen on October 8. The next day nine more. When Terbhoven’s done thirty-four innocent Norwegians lie in mass graves in Falstad woods. They were our leaders one day and dead the next. Life. So fragile. Even people that powerful can be snuffed out at random with no warning, their power worth nothing against the whim of an angry Nazi.
	We don’t have a clue what will happen to us tomorrow. How can we live like this? What is there to hang onto? 
				       	Chapter 56
				       	  KARI
	I close the door on the October dark and the first big snowfall of the year. There’s sobbing coming from the kitchen. It’s Mrs. Knudsen, in Mama’s arms. Mama looks at me over Mrs. Knudsen’s shoulder and shakes her head. It’s a sight I never thought I’d see — Rachel Knudsen sobbing. Rachel Knudsen, so strong, so capable, the shoulder others cried on.
	 October 25, 1942. The notices are posted all over town: All Jewish males over fifteen to be arrested, assets confiscated, bank accounts blocked. Jewish women to report daily to the nearest police station. The order is signed by Vidkun Quislling, German stooge.
 	It’s here, what we’ve feared ever since January when the Knudsens and all Trondheim’s Jews were ordered to bring identity documents to the police station where they marked them with a J. It’s what we’ve feared, listening to the terrifying stories on the BBC about roundups of Jews all over Europe. 
	“There’s hot water on the stove, Kari,” Mama says. “We need a cup of tea.”
	I take off my boots, hang my coat and forbidden red hat in the storeroom, take the jar of dried herbs off the shelf, notice how my hands are shaking. Get it together, Kari. It’s not your family being torn apart. 
	Mama and Mrs. Knudsen are at the kitchen table. Mama’s stroking Mrs. Knudsen’s fingers. I take down the good teapot and the flowered cups that match and keep my back turned so I can’t see the fear in Rachel Knudsen’s eyes.
	So she can’t see the fear in mine.
					*		*		*
		
	A worn black leather bag stands open on the Knudsen dining room table, surrounded by everything it will hold. 
	“I wanted you to see,” Mr. Knudsen says to Papa,”no contraband, nothing illegal, just modest treasures to keep out of the Nazi’s hands.”
	“We are so grateful for your help, Henrick,” Rachel Knudsen says. “They’ve been in our family for generations.” She’s wrapping each object in a soft cloth — two silver Shabbat candle sticks, the Passover Seder plate, the silver Kiddush wine cup, an eight branched Menorah. “And these.” She lifts two photo albums from the table, holds them close and kisses them before she puts them in the bag. 
	“If we’re going to be home before curfew, we have to leave now,” Papa says. “Come on, Kari.” 
	I’ve never been to the top of the church bell tower. The light from Papa’s flashlight reveals steep wooden stairs winding up and up into the dark. There’s no railing. My hand feels for the wall, for anything solid in this space without boundaries. Above us the wind whispers through the bells and there’s another sound — the whoosh of wings. Bats. They’re close. I freeze. The dim glow of the flashlight recedes as Papa reaches the top of the tower, leaving me in the dark. Get a grip, Kari. Bats do not bite. I climb higher, grasping at the rough wall for support. Then Papa reaches down and I grab for his hand and he pulls me onto the platform.  I breathe again.
	The new moon hangs over Trondheim lighting roofs and chimneys spread out to the water’s edge, but not even a sliver of light escapes from those houses. It’s totally dark, silent, like the city’s abandoned. 
	Papa opens the lid of a wooden chest pushed up against one wall. Decades of dust make us cough. He takes out coils of rope and tools, puts the leather bag in the bottom of the chest and covers it.
	“No one ever comes up here,” he says.“Their treasures will be safe.” 
	I take a last look at my silent city and follow him down the stairs, one hand clutching his shoulder. Will the black leather bag ever find its way back to the Knudsens? Maybe this is its final home. No. I will not believe that. I won’t even let myself think it. 
	“When the war is over. . .” People say it all the time. “That day will come.” I say the words to myself at the bottom of the stairs and take Papa’s hand.
					Chapter 57
					 SVEN
	First he smells the smoke. Then he hears the crackle and roar. Finally, through the thinning trees he sees crimson fingers reaching for the sky. His cabin, high up on the slope, explodes in a ball of flame.
	The Rinnan gang!
	From the shelter of the trees he searches for movement on the slope. Yes, there they are, two of them. They gesture at the collapsing cabin. He hears their laughter above the roar of flames.
	It’s the fury he feels first. The transmitter that has become his life, the MK Paraset he smuggled back from Scotland, the beautiful machine he’s mended, tended, babied, moved from hiding place to hiding place, that has faithfully received and transmitted messages these last three months— reduced to a twisted, useless, ugly thing. 
	Then the fear rolls over him and leaves him gasping. If he hadn’t detoured to the farm, hoping to see Lotte, he’d have been in the cabin. He’d have been reduced to a twisted, useless, ugly thing, too. He’s cheated them of that. Now the hunt will be on. For real.
	Sven skies down the mountain, fear pushing him fast, too fast. He’s always known it could come to this —  that he’d have to flee to Sweden. His mind spins and spins and his thoughts make no sense. The fear of overpowering evil grips him, almost blinds him. His body takes over from his mind, steering him down through the trees, down, down, around the final bend in the trail.
	And there they are. And they have him. And it begins.


	The pain is a bombardment of arrows. He tenses his whole body against the piercing of a hundred sharpened points but nothing stops the pain and the pieces drift away. If he can just grasp those pieces he will put them back together, put himself back together, make a whole, keep from flying apart. Just when he thinks he can reach one, it floats away. They are multicolored, some bright, most grey or black, tumbling around him and he cries out in frustration.
	Then the darkness.
				*		*		*
	
	 Another voice.
	“Svennnnn . . .”
	Who? Who is it?
	A touch, cool, brushing his forehead, his cheek, his lips. He prays for that touch to go on and on, easing the pain.
	“Svennnnn. . .” Again.
	Answer. He has to answer. He opens his mouth. Nothing comes out.
	The touch. He struggles up from the bottomless chasm, uses all his strength, swims through the pain, surfaces, forces his eyes open.
	Lotte! Her hand caresses his face. It was her voice calling him!
	Lotte! She holds one of his hands, gives a gentle squeeze. He tries to squeeze back. Can she feel it? His eyes are closing and he fights that, fights the sinking back, fights the dark. Keep them open, keep from going under! But he is falling. His mouth forms her name. 
	“Lotte.” 
	Does she hear him? Does she feel the love, feel it in fingers that try to squeeze hers, see it in eyes struggling to focus?
	“I love you, Sven.” That’s what she says, her gaze so fierce.
	 She loves him and she knows and she feels his love and it’s alright. He lets his eyelids close. She lifts his hand, spreads his fingers, places his palm over her pulsing heart and it beats so strong and he feels the soft warmth of her breast.

					Chapter 58
			                	 LOTTE
	Her father's whip whistles as he drives the galloping horses.
	Faster, Papa!
	Sven lies in the bottom of the sleigh covered with a bear skin rug. What if Carl Nielsen hadn’t found him bleeding in the snow? She won’t let herself go there.
	His body is shaking, won’t stop, and the face Lotte loves is bloody, swollen, barely recognizable. But his eyes had opened,  just for a second. She hadn’t imagined it. No. In that instant she’d seen a love so powerful it would stay with her the rest of her life, no matter what happened.  In that instant the love pouring from Sven’s broken body made them one and the only thing that mattered was  holding onto him, using every bit of  her will to keep that spark alive, to force life into him.
	And then he’d whispered her name and she’d felt the tiniest squeeze from the fingers she held.
	“I love you Sven.” He’d heard that. She was sure of it. She saw it in those eyes that locked onto hers. Then they closed and she couldn’t tell if he heard her begging him to stay with her, when she told him again and again how he was the only one who made her whole, how she couldn’t lose that, couldn’t lose him. 
  
					Chapter 59
					   KARI
	I’m on my way to Lotte’s farm for my daily visit with Sven — and to see ERIK! Lotte told me she doesn’t know  how long he’ll be there. It’s been two endless months since I’ve seen him and my bike can’t get me to the farm fast enough. 
	I was right to head to the barn. Erik’s helping Lotte clean stalls. I say his name and he turns and he has the biggest grin on his face, matching mine. 
	“Good thing you’re here, Kari,” Lotte says. “You can help my lazy brother finish the stalls.” She gives me a shoulder punch as she leaves. Then it’s just Erik and me and no need for words. We cling to each other, my head is on his chest, and I can hear his heart beating and the only thing better than that is his kiss.  
	“Please don’t tell me you’re here to blow up another ship,” I say. “I almost lost you the last time.”
	‘No. Much smaller targets — tanks.”
	“I’m coming with you, Erik.” It’s out of my mouth before I even realize what I’m saying.
	He looks at me and shakes his head. We never talk about my terror, but he knows. What he doesn’t know is that ever since the funeral something deep inside has been knowing at me, pushing me to be myself again, pre-nazi, to do more than make drawings, to find out who I really am - that scared rabbity girl who runs or faints or vomits, paralyzed at the sight of them, that panicky girl they created —or the old fearless Kari.
	I have to find out. 
	“Please let me come with you.” I keep my voice steady. “I need to do this for Sven and Jurgen — but mostly for me. Erik, you have to understand — I have to do this.”
	He looks at me for what seems like forever. Maybe he sees something in my eyes, maybe he sees something of the old Kari because finally he says “Alright.”
	He opens his rucksack and shows me what’s inside.“They’re called clams because of their size, also the way they attach. Only four-ounces, but they’re powerful enough to take out tanks or planes. That’s what I’ll be doing tonight. Are  you sure you want to come, Kari?”
	I hold his gaze, unblinking. He nods and hands me a rucksack. I put it on, feel the weight of the explosives against my back. This is real.
	We peddle on moonlit trails through the woods. It’s after curfew but German patrols never come this way — I think, wishing that made me feel better. I focus on the twisty trail and my pumping legs and keeping up with Erik to slow the thoughts trying to take over, thoughts of everything that could go wrong.
	It seemed to be working — until I see the barbed wire fence and what’s on the other side.
	Tanks, rows of them. Monsters. Monsters I’ve studied and drawn in all their ugliness. This close they are huge. I’ve never felt so tiny, but the terror is all too familiar — my stomach clenching, not enough air in my lungs, legs that don’t want to hold me up.
	Erik has wire cutters. We’re through. He's unpacking his rucksack, taking out the small mines. I stand there watching, paralyzed. I was wrong to come, wrong to think I could do this, that my old self was back.
	He stops, looks at me. “You don’t have to do this, Kari.” The disappointment in his voice is what does it. I force myself to take off the rucksack, undo the buckles, feel inside for the tiny mines. I  take one out and stroke it, run my fingers over its edges and in my mind I’m seeing the Nazi tank parked in front of City Hall, the one I drew, the one I could hardly bear to look at. But here I am, within touching distance of the killing machines and my fingers reach out and the gun green metal is freezing cold even on this August night. I haven’t fainted or vomited yet. 				Something has changed.
	I have the power to destroy this monster.
	I will do that. My hands shake. The clam’s magnet attaches and the dull thud is the sweetest music.

					Chapter 60
					     KARI
	My brother Sven. Almost killed by the bastards and we don’t even know if he’ll heal or  what sort of damage he’ll be left with. Papa has to get him to Scotland as soon as he can travel. It’s all I’ve thought about for days. That and how to get back at them.
	Over lunch break I stop by the art room. Mr. Lund’s eating his sandwich at his desk.
	“Do you have a minute?”
	“Yes. Of course. Come in. Have a seat”
 	Now that I’m here I’m having second thoughts. Am I really up to this?  He must see it in my face.
	”Something wrong, Kari?”
	I take a deep breath. I’ve come too far to back out now.
	“You’ve told me London needs information about the submarine pens the Nazis are building.  I want to try to get it.”
	“They’re always greedy for more, but listen, Kari, you know how heavily guarded the port is. I can’t send you in there, it’s just too dangerous.”
	Hearing him say no quashes my doubts.
	“Let me do this. Please, Mr. Lund. Besides, who else do you have?”
	He looks at me. I can see he’s teetering. If I give one more push .  .  .
	“You know what happened to Jurgen and Sven. You have to let me do this — for them.”
	He says “Meet me after school. The Cafe Lokka. Maybe there’s a way.”


	Mr. Lund’s sitting in a booth nursing a beer. The place is nearly empty — no curious eavesdroppers. 
	“I’ve thought of something that might work — if you’re really sure you want to do this, Kari.”
	“I haven’t changed my mind.”
	“Alright. The thing is, there’ll be no time to make your usual drawings — you have to get in and out fast.” He opens his briefcase and takes out something small wrapped in flannel. “This is a camera — believe it or not.” I pick it up. Dull brushed steel, about the thickness of a pack of cards, but a little longer, tiny enough to fit in the palm of my hand. It weighs almost nothing. “They gave me two of them. It’s a Minox Riga, a miniature spy camera, made in Latvia. To make the thing go, you pop in the tiny film canister, pull the camera open to arm the shutter, and click. To advance to the next photo, you collapse the camera, then reopen it.” He holds it up and looks through the view finder. “Smile,” he says, and demonstrates. It makes a strangely satisfying sound as the gears spin and click into place. He hands it to me and I take his photo. Simple.  “It does eight photos per film canister — that’s plenty to give London an idea of what’s going on in the submarine pen.”
	“How do I get in there? Have you figured that out, too?”
	“I think so. Trucks carrying building materials stream into the port all day, seven days a week. They have to go through a checkpoint, but there are too many for them to search every one. We’ll put you under a tarp. Odds are they won’t search that one. You’ll have about forty minutes — the time it takes the truck to unload. At noon most of the guards go off for lunch; they’ll  likely leave just one behind to guard the Russian prisoners of war work. They work through lunch, only fed morning and night. You’ll wear men’s clothes with a hat pulled down to hide your face. The prisoners shouldn’t be too interested in one more Norwegian guy, but you never know. Kari, are you  sure you want to go through with this?”
	I’m not sure at all, but I picture Sven’s broken body and I nod.
					Chapter 61
					  KARI
	I’ve made drawings of Nazi camps on Lotte’s egg runs. I’ve helped Erik place limpet mines on tanks. I even went with him once when he planted dynamite that blew up a rail line. 			But I’ve never snuck, solo, onto a heavily guarded Nazi base in the middle of the day.
	I managed to convince Mr. Lund, but there’s no way Erik would let me do this, so he can’t know. Neither can Mama and Papa, of course. Until Saturday I have to find a way to act normal, like nothing’s going on, like fear isn’t making me so jumpy I can barely sit still, like my mind isn’t so wrapped up on Saturday that I barley hear when someone’s talking to me. Nights are sleepless because my mind keeps replays over and over what could go wrong.
	I hid the tiny Minox Riga at the back of my underwear drawer and whenever I go into my bedroom I open the drawer and my fingers reach back to find its cool brushed steel — just to make sure it’s still there. 

	Saturday. A miserable morning of sleet mixed with snow after another miserable night of no sleep. If the temperature drops even a little Trondheim will be one giant ice rink. I head to the freight yard. Mr. Lund said I’d be hiding under a tarp covering a load of cables and wire and electrical stuff. He described the truck. I have its license number, The driver is expecting me. I’m telling myself this is going to work. 
	Mama left early to get her place in line at the grocers — there’s a rumor of butter today — so I can take my time picking out my disguise. I finally decide on my own oilskin jacket and Papa’s dark blue wool hat — the one with the oversized bill and ear flaps. I put it on and look in the mirror. Hardly any of my face shows. I take a look around the kitchen before I open the door. The crackle of the stove, Mama’s knitting on the table, my sketch pad and text books on the bench by the door, our boots lined up underneath. Papa’s pipe. This simple room. Most of our life takes place here.  
	It hits me. I could be leaving it for the last time.  

	Even on a Saturday there’s plenty of activity in the freight yard. It takes some wandering around before I spot my truck. The driver’s in the cab smoking while workers load stuff in the bed. I walk by casually at first just to get my bearings, calm my breathing. My pulse beats in my temples. Second pass. I stop at the truck’s half open window.
	“Hi. Think you could give me a ride into town?” The question I’m supposed to ask the driver. Surprise, my voice sounds normal. 
	He grunts, rolls down the window some more, and gives me the once-over. 
	“Sure. We leave soon as I have a load.”
	I climb into the cab. Up close I see a whiskery face etched by years of salt spray and sun — standard Trondheim fisherman. He starts the engine.
	No turning back. 
					Chapter 62
					    KARI
	The windshield wipers barely keep up with sleet turning to snow. It’s coming down in buckets now, turning the world  milky white, making it impossible to see more than a few feet. The driver pulls into a side street and stops. I clamber down from the cab and force my way under the brown tarp, into the freezing dark, squeezing between spools of heavy cable. 
 	The beat up truck rattles over cobblestones which means we’re at the port. The truck stops. The driver’s talking with the guards. What’s taking so long? I’m praying this is not the random truck they choose to search. Finally the engine starts. I breathe again. We rumble on for a couple of minutes. Another stop and I hear the cab door slam.
	“Come on out,” the driver says. “You’re in luck. Either everyone’s at lunch or they’re smart enough to stay inside.”
	I wriggle out of my hiding place. The submarine pens loom in front of me through a curtain of snow.
	“I’m back in thirty minutes. Be here. I’m not waiting for you. Understand?”
	I nod and he’s gone. My legs want to run after him, climb into the cab. Forget submarine bunkers. Forget about this whole thing.
	Stop! You have a job to do.
	I clutch the tiny camera in my jacket pocket and make my feet move toward the hulking skeleton of the submarine bunker. I step from the snow light into the gloom, hugging the wall, my eyes not seeing a thing for a long moment. Gradually I make out movement and gradually the movement takes form and breaks into its parts — and the parts are prisoners of war, Russian prisoners of war, like ants, scurrying, digging, drilling, hauling. There’s a buzz, like ant talk, as they swarm and disperse and swarm again. And the stench. A guard at the other end of the bunker is absorbed in his lunch. I make my way through the swarm, head down, to stairs at the side of the bunker leading to a walkway — probably for the guards. From above I should have a shot of the length of the bunker. Almost at the stairs I trip and fall against one of the prisoners. We stare at one another. Then I know. It’s the POW I gave my lunch to that day Lotte and I delivered eggs to the prison camp! There’s a shocked look of recognition on his face. I shake my head. Please, please don’t call the guard. He nods, lowers his eyes. I breathe again.
	I climb the stairs to the walkway, take the Minox Riga from my pocket, and open it. I’ve taken four photos when I hear screaming. One of the prisoners has detached himself from the mass. He’s pointing up at me! Others turn and begin to point, and the mass starts to shuffle my way. Rags on bones, scraps of clothing hanging from skeletons, eyes sunk deep in sockets, claws protruding from jacket sleeves.
	 The guard is on his feet.
	The prisoner I recognized punches the screaming POW and chaos breaks out below me,  a melee of  clashing bodies. I’m out of the bunker when I hear the shots ring out.
	Who survived? Who died? I’ll never know. But I know who saved my life.        
           					Chapter 63
					   KARI	
	Word spreads like the smoke billowing from Trondheim’s chimneys. They’re coming. The Nazis are coming, going house to house in teams, sweeping through the city, coming for them, collecting the Jews of Trondheim. 
	Our whole street fills with neighbors. There are screams from Nordre Gate, just one street over, then the roar of an engine. A tank turns the corner, its guns pointed straight down our street. Papa and I are with Rachel, Otto and Ilse Knudsen, in the middle of a crowd of a hundred neighbors. 
	We stand, all of us, facing the tank. Its gun swings back and forth, like it’s scenting its prey, but the crowd does not move. The tank inches forward until one of its giant treads is nudging Mrs. Johansen, ninety--five years old, straight and craggy as an old pine, hands on hips, staring up at the helmets poking out of the turret.
	Mrs. Johansen faces down the monster.

	The Nazis come to us looking for the Knudsen’s. We’ve been expecting them. Everyone knows that Papa leases the Knudsen boat, that Mama is Rachel Knudsen’s best friend. Still I jump at the sudden pounding on our door. We look at one another.
	If they find them here …
	Papa opens the door. Three grey uniforms, three pairs of shiny black boots. I look closer and gasp. It’s him. The German we took in on Christmas Eve. He knows about the trap door in the store room. He knows about the cellar. We lock eyes, then he heads for the storeroom and I stop breathing. The other two stomp off to the bedrooms and I hear the crash of furniture overturned, of  breaking glass.
	Time stops. I watch through the open door to the storeroom, waiting for him to lift the rug that covers the trap door, waiting for him to shout to the others that he’s found what they came for, triumph in his voice.
	But he doesn’t. He doesn’t.
	He pulls the cot away from the wall, looks behind the linen cupboard, opens it, pulls out sheets and towels and throws them on the floor, tips over the chest with papa’s fishing lures and empties papa’s tool box onto the rug that hides the trap door.
	We look at each other for a long moment. Then he brushes past me.
	“Nothing here,” he calls to the others.
	The door closes behind them and I breathe again. I sink into a chair and say my thank you prayer.  
	Papa lifts the trap door and the Knudsens clamber up the steep ladder from the cellar, Ilse, white faced, Mrs. Knudson with tears running down her cheeks. Mama hugs her. 
	“Come and sit,” she says. We gather around the kitchen table and Mama pours rose hip tea. I grasp the cup, greedy for its warmth. The stove’s red hot but I’m shivering.  
	Papa says “That was luck. Thank God. But you have to get to Sweden. You have to leave now!”
	All eyes automatically turn to Ilse. Mr. and Mrs. Knudsen stand a chance. But Ilse, in this cold, with her asthma? Ilse shakes her head. Mrs. Knudsen is sobbing.    
	 “Henrick, maybe we could hide them here,” Mama says.
	“Where? In an unheated cellar, in these temperatures? They’ll be back, you know they will, and we won’t be so lucky next time. No. We have to get you out of Trondheim.”
	“Not without Ilse,” Mrs. Knudsen says.
	“As soon as Sven can travel I’m getting him out of here, to Scotland, and I can take Ilse, too.”
	“No! Not my little girl! We’ve never been separated,” Mrs. Knudsen says through her sobs.
	“Listen, Rachel,” Mama says. “You and Otto have to go. You have to survive — for Ilse’s sake. If you stay and they find you, Rachel .  .  .”  She has an arm around Mrs. Knudsen’s shoulders.
	“She’s right,” Mr. Knudsen says.
	Mrs. Knudsen’s eyes are closed. She’s rocking back and forth, shaking her head, but she doesn’t protest. 
	“Mama, you can’t leave me, not here!” Ilse says, staring at me, eyes full of loathing. I stare back. For once we agree. Ilse here? I never thought I’d be blaming the Nazis for that kind of torture! 
	“I’m going to make arrangements,” Papa says. “Help them get ready.” He gets up from the table. “I’ll be back as soon as I can.” He’s out the door.
	“Kari, there are strips of dried moose meat in the cellar. See what else you can find for them to take along.” Mama helps Mrs. Knudsen up. “Come with me, Rachel. We have to find  you some warm clothes. You can’t ski to Sweden in a silk dress.”     

				         Chapter 64
					KARI
	Mr. and Mrs. Knudsen just left with Hans Wickum. He’ll be their pilot on the first leg of their journey.
	Mama  gathered our warmest clothes. I put together a knapsack of what we had in the house for food and waxed the skis. Then Hans was there and the good-byes started. There was a lot of clinging and a lot more tears before we watched them sky into the dark in the falling snow.
	Ilse was stone-faced through it all, even the planning of her future. She didn’t say a word as Mama and Papa and the Knudsens argued back and forth about possibilities. Finally they agreed she should go to Scotland to wait out the war. She and Sven will leave on Papa’s boat. Sven has to get out of Norway fast. Rinnan’s gang left him for dead out in the forest after they destroyed his cabin and they mustn’t find out they didn’t finish the job. He’s in bad shape. A miracle, really, that he’s still alive. Lotte and her mother nursed him, did what they could, but he needs more help than they can give.
	We have to hide Ilse until the weather clears and they can leave. So I’m stuck with her — or we’re stuck with each another. She gets my bed, I get the cot in the storeroom. She gets the pick of my sorry clothes and I get to watch as she eyes them with disgust. She gets Mama’s sympathy and pats on the shoulder and I get Mama’s lectures on how nice I have to be even though Mama knows exactly what Ilse’s done to me ever since I was seven. Mama’s right. I know I’d be frantic, too, if I were Ilse. Still, she could try, couldn’t she, not refuse to speak or even look at me?


	Hans Wickum is back in Trondheim. He handed the Knudsens over to the next pilot who will get them to the Swedish border. Ilse should be happy, right? If she is, it doesn’t show. 
	The weather’s cleared. Tonight Lotte will get Sven as close to the boat as possible, hidden in their sleigh, then Papa and Lotte’s father will help him the rest of the way. My job is to get Ilse to the boat. 
	She’ll be gone soon. Definitely a big relief. I’m not sure how much longer I could have held it together. But getting her to the boat — she doesn’t ski and with her asthma and trudging through the snow all that way in the dark .  .  . I try not to think about it. It is what it is. 
	She’s showing the strain. I don’t know if she’s sleeping —I hear her coughing in the night and the dark circles under eyes stand out against her too white skin. She hardly eats anything, despite Mama’s urging. Of course what we have is not all that appetizing —  definitely not what Miss Ilse is used to.
	The day. No snow. Clear sky during the few skimpy hours of October daylight. Mama’s off to see what she can scrounge with her remaining ration coupons and I’m rummaging through my closet pulling out the warmest layers I have for Ilse’s boat trip. She’s watching, a sneer on her face and I’ve had it!. 
	“Don’t look at me that way!” I heave a brown sweater onto the pile on the bed, my voice  a snarl. “Not up to your standards?” I know I should stop but I can’t. “Too bad you’re stuck with my sorry stuff. Too bad the Nazis sent all your pretty things to their girlfriends!” A picture of her pink bedroom flashes through my mind — the impossible doll house, all those Teddy bears. “Too bad you’ve had to stay in my dumpy room with all my dumpy stuff. No wonder you’re so upset.”
	Her face goes from white to red. Her dead eyes come alive, flashing hate. She comes at me. She lunges and I grab both her wrists. There’s no strength in them. I let go and she crumples to the floor, staring up at me. 
	“Do you think I care about any of that? I didn’t know you were that stupid!”
	Stupid? I’m itching to kick her, to shut her lying mouth for good! Instead I yell “Why did you do it all those years? Why did you try to make my life miserable? It was only a Teddy bear, Ilse — and you didn’t even miss it.”
	She’s on her feet now and the face I want to slap is way too close. 
	“You are stupid,” she screams. “You’re the one who tortured me! Kari and her skiing, Kari and her skating, Kari who goes moose hunting and isn’t she the brave one! Have you seen Kari’s latest painting? So original! Mama and Papa, on and on. Their daughter will never be a normal girl, let alone live up to the perfect Kari.” She shakes her fist in my face. “All that stuff they gave poor, poor Ilse — because of their guilt, like somehow that would make up for what I would never be. Every gift made the hurt worse, made me hate you more. You are everything I want to be, Kari Jensen, everything I will never be!” 
	She drills me with those eyes and her words puncture holes in the world I was so sure of and the anger drains away.
	“Then you took Erik.” With that she sinks to the bed, her voice a whisper I strain to hear. “And just look, now you have my life is in your hands. That should make you happy. Your big triumph.”
	 I sit beside her, reach out to touch her hand. Her fingers are so cold. I gather them up. She lets me. “I didn’t know,” I say. We sit there for a long time.
					Chapter 65
					    KARI
	Papa’s left for Lotte’s farm to help with Sven. Mama’s dressed Ilse in enough layers to brave the Arctic. There’s nothing more to do. Nothing left to say. Its time to go.
	I  have our route planned, but still my heart’s doing double time as Mama closes the door behind us. No moon tonight — a good thing, I guess. Everything is silence and bitter, bitter cold and the wind is picking up. The streets are deserted, Trondheim’s huddled behind blackout curtains. We take alleyways, mostly, winding our way down the hill toward the fishing boats. We haven’t spoken much since what happened this afternoon, but something’s changed. I’m not that surprised when she takes my arm. 
	“You’ll have the scholarship now,” she says. “You should have had it to begin with. I’m not so dim I can’t tell the difference between what I paint and art.”
	I give her arm a squeeze. Something definitely has changed. In the snow light I can see her eyes are sad, but there’s no anger or hate in them. 
	“Listen, Kari. The cowards on the committee were afraid of your painting, you know that, afraid of what the Nazis would do if they gave the prize to your Trondheim. I painted what they wanted to see. And I won. I know that city doesn’t exist anymore, all  beautiful and safe.” A soft chuckle. “Since you’re the runner-up they won’t have a choice — they’ll have  to give the scholarship to you.”
	Ilse coughs and pulls the scarf over her nose and mouth. I hear the rattle in her lungs.
	“It’s the freezing air,” she gasps.   
	“What can I do?”
	“Nothing. We have to keep going.”
	The only sound is the crunch of our steps in the snow and Ilse’s coughing. We stop and she leans against me, struggling for air, her breath so ragged. When the coughing fit is over we move on, going slower. This is taking a lot longer than I planned and the wind has picked up, penetrating all those layers, making my face burn. I pull my scarf up to cover everything but my eyes, and help Ilse do the same.. 
	By the time we reach the port I’m half-carrying her and we’ve run out of alleys. We turn the corner and wind off the water hits us like it wants to rip our clothes off, layer by layer. Waves explode over the breakwater and shatter as they hit the frigid pavement, turning the cobbles purly grey with ice. The Knudsen’s boat tosses in the swell, fifth from the quay. We’re almost there.
	 We have to pass a bar. It throws its light across the road. Sounds leak out — German laughter, German shouts, German curses.  I freeze. The old paralyzing terror floods through all of me.  
	“Come on, Kari,” Ilse urges.
	“I can’t.”
	“You can. We can.” She takes a step, pulling at my arm. “For Jurgen. Say it.” 
	 I get it out. “For Jurgen.” His precious name pierces the paralysis and my feet move. We’re almost past the bar. The door opens letting out a wave of sound. There are steps behind us — and German voices.
	“Keep going,” Ilse says.
	They surround us. A booming voice, speech slurred. “What do we have here? Frauleins out looking for business?”
	Another one says “They must be desperate, out in this weather. Good thing we’re not that fussy.”
	Their laughter and then an arm around my waist. I wrench myself away. One of the others grabs at Ilse. Her coughing starts — but it’s not like before, it’s like she’s coughing up her lungs.
	“What’s wrong with her?” one of them asks. 
	The word is out of my mouth before I even think it.	“Tuberculose.”
	And then she does it — vomits with a force that sprays two of the monsters.
	“Scheise!” one of them yells. “Get her out of here!”
	She’s free. “Go!” I say. I start after her.
	“Not you!” It’s the booming voice, his fist clenching my arm. “Too bad, now you have to do the work of two.” I kick out at him. He lets go of my arm as he slips on the ice and goes down.
	Ilse stops, turns back. “I won’t leave you!”
	“No! Run!” I yell. Then she’s gone. They have me up against the wall, arms pinned, pawing at my layers and my vision blurs and sounds come from far away and I’m drifting, floating, watching what happens below, down there on the icy pavement, watching as I kick and scream and bite and it’s different from the other time because I’m not that vulnerable little girl any longer. I am strong and no matter what they do to my body, they can not destroy me. I will survive. And Ilse will survive. And that is all that matters.
  	The bar door opens. “Kari!” A voice reaches me. I know that voice. Our Christmas German! “Let her go!” 
	“What do you care, she’s just a little whore out looking for business.”
	“Right. But she’s here to meet me! Let her go!”
	They do, grumbling as they stumble and slip down the road. Then he’s holding me up and I’m sobbing against his shoulder, the German uniform rough against my cheek.

				             1945
					  Chapter 66 
              			                 KARI 
	We knew it was coming. Ever since June of ’44 and the Normandy landings we’ve followed the allied advance. And then in October, the Soviet forces crossed into Norway from Finland, chasing the  retreating Germans. They destroyed everything in their path, absolutely everything. Refugees poured into Trondheim from cities that were no more. We celebrated when the Brits finally destroyed the Terpitz, Hitler’s prize battleship, after trying half a dozen times.
	We were sure it would happen fast, a quick Nazi collapse, but then, somehow, they put together an army of 200,000 at the Battle of the Bulge in December, and there were the horrible new V1 and V2 bombs raining down on London, and we wondered, would it never end?
	No quick collapse, they’d have to be pushed back inch by inch. There were still hundreds of thousands of German troops in Norway. What if they did to the rest of the country what they’d done in the north, what if that was their last stand,? Reichskommissar Terboven, that evil bastard, would never accept unconditional surrender.
	Then things started happening fast.
	On April 30 Hitler committed suicide and Admiral Donitz took over. On May 5 the Germans surrendered in Denmark. On May 7 Admiral Donitz fired Terboven and ordered his replacement to go on the radio and declare that German troops in Norway would obey capitulation orders. Finally.
	That was all it took for the resistance to come out of hiding. They were everywhere, from the Royal Palace in Oslo to Trondheim’s City Hall — some 40,000 armed Norwegians — and we took to the streets with the Norwegian flags we’d hidden for years. Best of all, on May 8  we learned Terboven had blown himself up in his bunker with 50 kg of dynamite. 
	And then we heard it — on radios that came out of hiding, the news we’d been waiting for so long!
BBC WORLD SERVICE: THIS IS LONDON. THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RIGHT HONORABLE  WINSTON CHURCHILL.
	“YESTERDAY MORNING AT 5:30 A.M. AT GENERAL EISENHOWER’S HEADQUARTERS, GENERAL JODL, THE REPRESENTATIVE OF THE GERMAN HIGH COMMAND, AND GRAND ADMIRAL DONETZ, THE ATTENDING HEAD OF THE GERMAN STATE, SIGNED THE ACT OF UNCONDITIONAL SURRENDER OF ALL GERMAN LAND, SEA AND AIR FORCES IN EUROPE TO THE ALLIED EXPEDITIONARY FORCES AND SIMULTANEOUSLY TO THE SOVIET HIGH COMMAND. HOSTILITIES WILL END OFFICIALLY AT ONE MINUTE AFTER MIDNIGHT TONIGHT, TUESDAY, THE EIGHTH OF MAY. BUT IN THE INTEREST OF SAVING LIVES, A CEASEFIRE BEGAN YESTERDAY TO BE SOUNDED ALONG ALL THE FRONTS. THE GERMAN WAR IS THEREFORE AT AN END.	
	It was happening! It was really happening! But what about the King? I brought up his  portrait, carefully wrapped, carefully hidden for all those years in the cellar behind the dill pickle vat. When we heard Churchill’s announcement, we hung it in the parlor, in the place of honor above the sofa. Then we waited. It took a month.
	On June 7 King Harken VII sailed up the Oslo fjord on the HMS Norfolk — exactly five years after he'd fled to London, five long, long years. I’d have given anything to watch him arrive escorted by hundreds of flag decorated boats, to cheer and scream and  dance and cry and hug random strangers! Instead, we clustered around our radio and I wasn’t the only one with tears running down my face at the sound of that voice.
	Our King said “In this time of rejoicing, we must not forget that we have a great and difficult task ahead of us to achieve what we wish to build here in our land: a free and benevolent society for the good people of Norway.”
	Then National Anthem and we heard thousands and thousands of voices, and we stood there, eyes on his portrait, hands on our hearts, singing loud as we could through happy sobs.   
	We knew he was right about what it would take to rebuild Norway. So many towns in the north had been destroyed, so many people homeless, and what the Nazis didn’t destroy they’d  confiscated. So much was just plain worn out — nothing had been repaired or taken care of for five whole years. We’d have to start all over again — from scratch.

	It’s over. I have to keep reminding myself. Can it possibly be true? Five long years we’ve longed to hear those words, prayed to hear them. What will we do now? Where will we go with this new freedom now that every decision is ours to make? We’re totally out of practice, we’re like little kids just learning to take responsibility for our actions. It’s giddy. It’s terrifying.
	 

				         EPILOGUE	
	Ilse was right. They gave me the scholarship. I’m half way through my first year, and loving it. Of course I miss Trondheim, miss Mama and Papa, Lotte and Sven. Oslo is the big city, bustling, always in a hurry, rebuilding, construction everywhere, but I love its energy and I like knowing the King is in the palace on the hill and parliament is back to arguing as usual. I love waking up every morning looking forward to what will happen instead of dreading some new Nazi atrocity.
	 We’re living in the afterglow of victory, gradually getting used to normal life. I still have nightmares, but not nearly as many. I still chew every bite as if it might be my last even though there’s more in the stores every week. I’m still suspicious of strangers, still have to tell myself it’s safe to chat with someone I haven’t known since pre-school, that they won’t be members of the Rinnan gang.
	Ah, Henry Rinnan. He tried to escape to Sweden with some of his gang members, but they were caught. He’ll be tried. He’ll be executed. Vidkun Quisling, the Nazi stooge, has also been arrested along with thousands of other collaborators — including Jurgen’s father. The courts will be busy for years.
	Erik. My Erik. The sinking of the Donitz was just the beginning for him. Toward the end of the war the resistance was doing everything it could to disrupt German troop movements and stop vital iron ore shipments out of Norwegian ports. Dynamite was Erik’s specialty. I was with him on some of his missions. I’ll never know everything he destroyed, but it was enough to earn him a trip to Oslo and the St. Olav Medal with Oak Branch for “exceptional service to Norway during time of war.” King Haaken himself pinned it on his uniform!  
	Erik’s joined the regular army. He says any civilian job would be way too boring after what he’s been up to. So far they’ve assigned him to work on repatriating German troops, some 360,000 of them, plus 100,000 Russian prisoners of war, nothing dangerous or exciting. I don’t get to see him that much. He travels all over the country, only in Oslo for a day or two at a time. With three other students in our tiny two bedroom flat, forget privacy.
	When we’re together it’s like the very first time. He’s alive, we’re both alive and that’s all that matters.
	Saga and Lotte are training again. Lotte writes a letter every week with details of their progress. Her father didn’t get to see the end of the war. He died of a heart attack a year ago so now she’s totally responsible for the farm. The good news is that Lotte and Sven are engaged! Papa brought Sven back from Scotland on the Nordlys two months ago. He’s mostly recovered, but they couldn’t save his left eye. I tell him he looks very jaunty with his black patch. Maybe one day he’ll do that engineering course, but for now he seems more than happy with Lotte and the farm. 
	Then there’s Anna. She’s still a beauty. I see her from time to time. She’s changed the most of any of us, totally different from the flighty Anna I grew up with. The Nazis sent her baby to Germany. She’s sober, quiet, mourning the daughter she’ll never know, the daughter she never wanted. Anna can’t go back to Trondheim. Her parents want nothing to do with her — especially now that any woman associated with the Nazis is looked on as a German whore. At least in Oslo no-one knows. Anna is working as an apprentice to a fashion designer. She loves the work even though it pays almost nothing. I have a feeling she and her boss may be more than friends.
	And Ilse? My ex-worst enemy writes often. She’s at university in Scotland, enjoying the freedom of being on her own, making her own decisions. Her asthma is still a problem but she’s coping — because she has to without parents there to coddle and shield her from life. I don’t think she’ll ever return to Norway.
	Rachel and Otto Knudsen are back in Trondheim and Knudsen’s Dry Goods is slowly restocking. They were the lucky ones. Over seven hundred Norwegian Jews were sent to Germany. Only twenty five survived. We find out more every day about what went on right under our noses at the Falstad concentration camp outside Trondheim. There were no visits, no parcels, no medical treatment. Prisoners had to march or sometimes crawl to a quarry where they were made to creep fully dressed into a creek, forced to lie down in it. They had to go through the day soaking wet. Old people and the sick were made to crawl around the camp courtyard picking up fallen leaves with their mouths. Some had very hot water poured over their naked bodies and then had to brush themselves with a stiff brush before they were doused with water that was freezing cold. Some of the old and sick were taken to the Falstad forest, thrown into a pre-dug grave and shot. We knew it was bad. We’re still trying to get our minds around how impossibly horrible it was.
	Rachel Knudsen and many others are working to restore the Synagogue after it was used as a German barracks. So much to do. The holy shrine for the Torah rolls, the altar, and the prayer stand were destroyed, the benches chopped up, the chandeliers used for target practice. They even took the Stars of David out of the stained glass windows and replaced them with swastikas. 
	Before I moved to Oslo I helped Papa retrieve the Knudsen’s black bag from the church bell tower. We watched them unpack their treasures. Then we celebrated with a Shabbat meal. It was wonderful.

	Erik and Lotte and Sven and I have promised each other we’ll ride to the top of the waterfall again next April 9 and it will be just a normal outing, no swastika-decked planes to interrupt us this time. We’ll look down on a Trondheim at peace but still recovering — pretty much like we are. 
	Anna won’t be there. Neither will precious Jurgen, of course, but at the top of the waterfall we’ll tell Jurgen stories and we’ll laugh and I know we’ll cry. He will always be a part of us. Our hero. For sure we will never forget how he conquered his fear. I will never forget how he helped me conquer mine.
	We’ll have another friend along on our outing, someone who hated the Nazis as much as we did. Andreas came back to Norway as soon as he could after being demobbed. He’s kind and funny and totally in love with Norway. His Norwegian is almost native now and he had no trouble getting a job as a ski instructor. We let everyone know how brave he was, how he kept the Germans from finding the Knudsens, how he saved me from the drunk Nazi’s the night of Ilse’s escape. Andreas and I are still the only ones who know how I came to have missing braids. It’s just better that way.
	So life is returning to normal — slowly. Most everything is still rationed, but the Germans are gone and the lines aren’t as long. Mama doesn’t have to use fish roe as a flour substitute and the cormorants finally have their eggs all to themselves. Next spring Mama will plant flowers in her front garden instead of potatoes. It will take time for a cutting of her Leda rose to grow and bloom, but she won’t mind. It will take time for our country to recover and grow and it will take time for each of us, too — to heal, to find our way. But we’ve learned patience.
	It seems like an eternity ago that Sven and I were sweating in the sauna and he was talking about the Nazis robbing us of our growing-up years. Sometimes I wonder who we’d be now if the war had never happened. Sven was right — we missed out on a lot of great times, but the thing is, the war brought us so much closer to one another, forced us to focus on what really mattered. It tested our limits for sure, showed up our weaknesses —  but it also showed us strengths we didn’t know we had.
	It’s over. I have to keep reminding myself. I say it out loud again — it’s over.

	       
	
	
	
	  
	  
			
	
	
	 


	 	   
	 
 


	       
	
	



	
	     
      
	   
	 
	     


	
	 
" 
	 
		  	 
	
	
	 
	 

  
	
	, 

	
	 
	 
   
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	     
	 	  
     
              
	 
	 
	
	 
	
	
	
	
	     
	
	


	 	      
     

	
	
	. 
 
	

	
	




	 
	      
	

 171
1



